Session 31: Submit to One Another

Key Takeaways
Verse 22 to the wives and verse 25 to the husbands are illustrations of the same governing verb
"submitting.” Wives and husbands are to submit to one another out of reverence for the Messiah.
Paul’s redefinition of submission as considering other people as more important than yourself was a
radical statement in an honor/shame society.

“Mutual Submission” in the Context of the Greco-Roman World:
Two Views of Paul’s Meaning
View 1
“The pronoun ‘to one another’ does not mean that all believers are to submit to all other believers but that,
among believers, submission should take place as it is described in 5:22–6:9.”
Thielman, Frank (2010). Ephesians (Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament). Baker Academic.
373.

View 2
“The mutual submission admonished here relativizes conventional authority structures for people who lived
in a society where status and authority were rigidly marked and strictly observed. The epistle’s call for a
relativity of authority within the Spirit-filled body requires a disposition of humility similar to that described
in Philippians 2:3–4, where others are considered to be of higher status, and people attend to the interests
of others rather than their own. Moreover, mutual submission is done ‘in reverence for Christ.’ That is,
believers’ obedience to Christ will lead them to submit to one another. Whatever authority and status an
individual might have in the world is relativized by believers’ common service to one Lord, Christ. In this
common service they are both able to and called to submit to each other.”
Fowl, Stephen E. (2012). Ephesians: A Commentary. Westminster John Knox Press. 186-187.
In view 2, Ephesians 5:21 is parallel to Galatians 5:13 “become slaves of one another through love. ... This
expression [Gal. 5:13] adjusts an inherently hierarchical relationship (slavery) not by canceling it, in the
name of ‘equality,’ but by making it reciprocal, a hierarchy that turns both ways. The simple but powerful
word ‘one another’ (Grk. ἀλλὴλοις) turns a one-way relationship of power and superiority into a mutual
relationship of reciprocal deference, where each seeks to promote the interests of the other.”
Barclay, John M. G. (2017). Paul and the Gift. Eerdmans. 435.

Class Notes: Ephesians

118 of 134

Reflection Question
This session presents two views of the concept of mutual submission in the context of the Greco-Roman
world. Which view is the most compelling to you and why?

Class Notes: Ephesians

119 of 134

Module 11: An Epic Conclusion
SESSIONS 32-35
Experience the epic conclusion of Paul’s letter to the Ephesians.

Class Notes: Ephesians

120 of 134

