Session 28: From Old to New Humanity (Eph. 4:17-5:2)

Key Takeaways
In Ephesians 4:22, "self" is the Greek word for “human,” referring to a communal identity, not an
individual one.
The moral exhortations in chapters 4-6 are grounded in the vision of the new humanity from chapters 13.
Paul doesn't tell people to become someone new. He tells people to become who they really are.

God’s Family as a Renewed Humanity: Translation and Literary
Design of Ephesians 4:17-5:2
17

Therefore I say
and I testify by the Lord,
that you should walk no longer
as the nations walk
in the futility of their mindset,
18

having been in the dark in their mindset,

estranged from the life of God
because of the ignorance which is in them,
on account of the hardness of their heart,
19

who, after making themselves calloused,
they gave themselves over
to a lack of self-control
resulting in deeds of every kind of impurity
along with insatiable desire.

20

But in such a way
you did not learn the Messiah,
21

if indeed you have heard of him
and were taught in him,
as truth is in Jesus,
22

that y’all are to take off the old humanity
of y’all’s former way of life,
which is being corrupted
by its deceptive desires,

23

and to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,

24

and to put on the new humanity
which has been created
in accordance with God,
in justice and true piety.

25

Therefore, having put off the lie,
“speak truth each one with his neighbor,”
because we are members of one another.

26

“Be angry and do not sin.”

Do not let the sun set on your anger,
27
28

and don’t give an opportunity to the slanderer.

The one who steals,
let him no longer steal,
27

but rather let him labor,
producing good with his own hands,
so that he can have something to share with the one who has need.

29

Any rotten word,
don’t let it come out of y’all’s mouth,
but only what is good for building up what is needed,
so that it might give grace to those who hear.

30

And do not grieve the holy Spirit of God,

31

All bitterness and anger and wrath and blasphemy,

by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.

let it be taken from you,
along with all wickedness.
32

But be kind to one another,
compassionate,
forgiving one another,
just as God in the Messiah forgave you.

5:1

Therefore, become imitators of God
as beloved children,
2

and walk in love,
just as the Messiah loved us
and gave himself
as an offering
and a sacrifice to God
as a pleasant aroma.

Class Notes: Ephesians

106 of 134

Ephesians 4:17-5:2. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Ephesians 4:17-19
Paul picks up his portrayal of the gentile’s moral condition from Ephesians 2:3 (“doing the desires of the flesh
and of the mind,” Greek: διανοια). He stacks four phrases with overlapping and climactic meaning.
“Futility (ματαιος) of the mind”
“Darkened (ἐσκοτιζειν) in the mind”
“Estranged from the life of God through ignorance”
“Due to the hardening of the heart”

Ephesians 4:20-24
“You learned the Messiah” (Eph. 4:20) and “as truth is in Jesus” (Eph. 4:21) are unique phrases in the New
Testament.
“Learning the Messiah”: To “learn a person” is an unparalleled expression in the Bible. It assumes the
content of the message and teaching of Christianity is Jesus himself, not a moral philosophy or life
improvement. Being a Christian means engaging with him personally to learn a new way to be human.
“As truth is in Jesus”: The real truth of Christian faith isn’t at its root found in a systematic arrangement
of concepts. Rather, the truth is a person and is discovered by knowing and following him.

Ephesians 4:22-32
Paul contrasts the old humanity and the new humanity.

The Old Humanity

The New Humanity

Take off your old human

Put on the new human

Of your former way of life

Being renewed in the spirit of your mind

That is being ruined by deceptive desires

That has been created according to God in
righteousness and holiness of truth

Take off lying

Speak truth

Anger

Not allowing the sun to set on your anger

Let the stealer no longer steal

Work so that you can share with others

The Old and New Humanity. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Class Notes: Ephesians

107 of 134

The Old Humanity

The New Humanity

No rotten speech

Speak words that build others up and give a gift

No bitterness, anger, wrath, yelling, blasphemy

Kindness, compassion, forgiveness

The Old and New Humanity. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Paul doesn’t simply prohibit destructive behaviors. He also commends new habits and practices to replace
the old. If one starts practicing generosity or conflict resolution, the experience of anger or desire for
shouting matches will slowly die away.

Paul’s Old Testament Quotes in 4:25-30
Ephesians 4:25 Instructor's Translation
Therefore, putting off lying, speak truth each one with his neighbor.
Zechariah 8:16 NASB*
These are the things you are to do: speak truth to one another
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The entirety of Zechariah is addressing the post-exilic community of Judah, urging them to remain faithful to
the covenant in light of the divine promise.
Zechariah 8:3 NASB
Thus says the LORD, “I will return to Zion and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. Then Jerusalem will be
called the City of Truth, and the mountain of the LORD of hosts will be called the Holy Mountain.”
The whole chapter calls the Israelites to live in the present in light of those future hopes, especially because
of the fact that the Gentile nations will one day be summoned to build the new temple with the restored Israel
(Zech. 8:20-23). The chapter fits perfectly the now-not-yet framework of Paul’s worldview.
Ephesians 4:26 Instructor's Translation
Be angry and do not sin.
Psalm 4:4 Instructor's Translation
Shudder/Tremble (with anger) but do not sin;
speak to your heart, but be silent.
“The psalmist advises his adversaries to keep their rage within themselves, to maintain control of their
actions and their evil words. It was when they spoke out loud and acted (v. 3) that their inner evil was
released to afflict the innocent. And though silence and lack of action would not remove the rot within, it
would at least curtail its evil effects.”

Class Notes: Ephesians

108 of 134

Craigie, Peter C. (2004). Word Biblical Commentary: Psalms 1-50. Thomas Nelson Inc. 81.
“Here too Paul may have had the wider context of the psalm in mind when he used these words. He has just
forbidden falsehood (4:25), one of the sins in which the psalmist’s adversaries were engaged (Ps. 4:2). Paul
is also about to recommend that his readers not let the sun set on their anger (4:26b), an idea that may
have been prompted by the psalmist’s advice to his enemies not to act on their anger, but instead to
ponder their feelings in silence on their beds (Ps. 4:4b)”
Thielman, Frank S. (2007). “Ephesians.” Commentary on the New Testament Use of the Old Testament. Baker
Academic. 825.
Ephesians 4:30 NIV
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Isaiah 63:9b-10 NIV
9b

In his love and mercy he redeemed them;

he lifted them up and carried them
all the days of old.
10

Yet they rebelled

and grieved his Holy Spirit.
So he turned and became their enemy
and he himself fought against them.
“The statement echoes the language of Isaiah 63:10, although it neither translates the Hebrew text literally
('they grieved [ʿatsab] his Holy Spirit') nor matches the rendering in the LXX ('they provoked [paroxyno] his
Holy Spirit'). Within its context, Isaiah 63:10 describes how Israel’s rebellion against God, even after he had
showed them mercy, turned God into their enemy and resulted in their exile. Elsewhere in his
correspondence Paul turns God’s judgment on a rebellious Israel into an admonition to God’s
eschatologically restored people not to follow the example of their ‘fathers’ (1 Cor. 10:1–22).”
Thielman, Frank S. (2007). “Ephesians.” Commentary on the New Testament Use of the Old Testament. Baker
Academic. 825-826.

Ephesians 5:1-2
The invitation to “become imitators of God” follows from the description of the “new human that is being
created according to God” (Eph. 4:24).
Notice, then, that this link to the new human is directly connected to the model of the Messiah’s love,
exemplified in the self-giving offering of his life as a sacrifice and offering. This is foundational for Paul’s
experience and conviction about the Messiah’s love.
Galatians 2:20 Instructor's Translation
I have been crucified with the Messiah, and I no longer live, but the Messiah lives in me. And what I now live
in the flesh, by faith I live in the Son of God who loved me and gave himself over for me.

Class Notes: Ephesians

109 of 134

Notice also that being an imitator of God requires imitating the love of the Messiah. The two are so closely
aligned in Paul’s mind that to imitate one is to imitate the other, which was introduced already in
Ephesians 4:32, “just as God in the Messiah forgave y’all.”

Reflection Question
In Ephesians, Paul teaches that the new humanity is a present reality. Reflect on the idea that Paul is saying
“act as you really are” rather than “become somebody different.” What difference does this make?

Class Notes: Ephesians

110 of 134

