Session 23: Paul’s Prayer for Love

Key Takeaways
Paul concludes chapter 3 with a prayer that functions as a climactic summary of the core themes of
Ephesians 1-3.
To truly grasp the different dimensions of God's love, we must spend time with fellow Jesus followers
who come from diverse backgrounds so that aspects of God’s love do not remain beyond our reach.
Ephesians 3:17 is about deepening our commitment to each other and discovering God's love.

A Prayer for Love Among God’s Family: Translation and Literary
Design of Ephesians 3:14-21
14

For this reason,
I bow my knee to the Father,
15

from whom every family-clan

16

so that he would give to y’all,

in the heavenlies and on the earth
is named,

according to the richness of his glory,
power to be strengthened
through his Spirit
in your inner human,
17

that the Messiah would dwell
in your hearts
through faith,
having been rooted
and established
in love

18

so that y’all would be empowered
to comprehend
along with all of the holy ones
what is the width and length and height and depth—
19

to know the
far-beyond knowing
love of the Messiah

so that y’all would be filled up
unto all the fullness of God.
20

Now to the one who is powerful
beyond all things
to do overabundantly more
than what we would ask or conceive,
according to the power which is at work in us,
21

to him be glory
in the church
and in Messiah Jesus
for all generations of the age of the ages, amen.

Ephesians 3:14-21. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Flow of Thought in 3:14-21
Ephesians 3:14-15: Paul prays to the Father of all the “children of God,” both heavenly (i.e., the loyal cosmic
forces that have not rebelled) and earthly (i.e., the tribes of humanity unified in the Messiah).
Ephesians 3:16-17: Paul’s first request is two-part. He asks for (1a) God to give the people power (cf. 1:19) to
enable an inner transformation and be strengthened by the Spirit so that (1b) the Messiah could take up
temple residence in their communal hearts as they learn to love and serve one another.

Class Notes: Ephesians

85 of 134

Ephesians 3:18-19: Paul’s second request is also two-part. He asks that this “power” and “presence” would (2a)
empower the people to grasp the cosmic scope of God’s love, that is, to (2b) experientially know the love of
the Messiah that is beyond our full comprehension so that God’s own life “fills them unto all the fullness of
God.”
Ephesians 3:20-21: Paul praises God who is powerful to do beyond what humans can conceive of and
acknowledges that God’s power is what’s at work in the Messiah’s people.

The Role of 3:14-21 in the Flow of Ephesians 1-3
This prayer functions as a climactic summary of the core themes of chapters 1-3. Nearly every phrase in 3:1421 picks up a key image or word from earlier in the letter.

Ephesians 3:14-21

Links Back to Ephesians 1-3

The united heaven

3:14-15: “I kneel before

1:10-11: God’s purpose “to head-up all things

and earth and all its

the Father from whom

together in the Messiah, things in heaven and

human and spiritual

every family in the

things on earth ”

inhabitants derive

heavenly and earthly

from the creator of

realms

gets its name ”

all

1:20-21: God “raised the Messiah from among the
dead ones and seated him at his right hand in the
heavenly realm , far above all rule and authority
and power and dominion and every name which
is named ”
2:6: “And [God] raised us with the Messiah and
seated us in the heavenly realm ”

God’s generosity,

3:16a: “that he would

1:7: “in whom we have … forgiveness of sins,

power, and grace are

give y’all, according to

according to the richness of his glory ”

drawn from an

the richness of his

infinite storehouse

glory …”

of riches

1:18: “that y’all might know what is the hope of his
calling and what is the richness of the glory of
his inheritance with/among the holy ones.”
2:7: “so that [God] could display … the richness of
his grace , shown by kindness to us in Messiah
Jesus.”
3:8: “To me … was given this grace to announce to
the nations the good news of the inexhaustible
richness of the Messiah”

Hyperlinks in Ephesians 3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Class Notes: Ephesians

86 of 134

Ephesians 3:14-21

Links Back to Ephesians 1-3

The Spirit takes up

3:16: “that he would give

1:18-20: I pray that you might know “what is the

residence in the

to y’all … power to be

surpassing greatness of his power towards us

corporate life of his

strengthened by his

who trust, in accordance with working of the

people to give them

Spirit in our inner

might of his strength , which he worked out in

human”

the Messiah by raising him from the dead ones …

new power

far above every … power and dominion.”
3:7: “I became a servant [of the good news]
according to the gift of God’s grace which was
given to me according to the working of his
power .”
1:17: I pray “that God would give you a spirit of
wisdom and revelation as you know him”
2:18: “we both have access by one Spirit to the
Father”
2:22: “y’all are being built together into a dwelling
house of God by means of the Spirit ”

3:17: “so the Messiah can

1:10: “the arranged-house-plan (οἰκονομια) of the

temple/house that is

dwell (κατοικησαι) in

fulfillment of the times, to head-up all things

being built

y’all’s hearts through

together in the Messiah”

according to the

trust …”

God’s new

house-plan as a

2:19-22: “y’all are fellow citizens of the holy ones

place for God to

and members (οἰκειοι) of God’s house , built

dwell

(οἰκοδομηθεντες) on the foundation of the apostles
and prophets, the Messiah Jesus being the
cornerstone, in whom the entire building

(οἰκοδομη) is fitted together and grows into a holy
temple in the Lord, in whom y’all are being built
together (συνοικοδομεισθε) into a dwelling place

(κατοικητηριον) of God, by the Spirit”
3:9-10: “the arranged-house-plan (οἰκονομια) of
the open-secret … that now the multi-faceted
wisdom of God might be made known through the
church to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly
realms”

Hyperlinks in Ephesians 3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Class Notes: Ephesians

87 of 134

Ephesians 3:14-21

Links Back to Ephesians 1-3

God’s love is prior to

3:17: “as you have been

1:4-5: “having pre-established us in love for

all reality

rooted and founded

adoption through Jesus Messiah”

God’s new temple

in love ”

and new tree of life

2:4: “But God, who is rich in mercy, because of the
great love with which he loved us ”
2:20-21: “having been built on the foundation (

θεμελιος) of the apostles and prophets … y’all
grow (αὐξει) into a holy temple”
Power to know the

3:18-19a: “that you

1:18: “that that eyes of your heart would be

true apocalyptic

would have power to

enlightened in order to know … what is the

reality

comprehend with all of

richness of his inheritance with/among the holy

the holy ones … to

ones”

know the beyondknowing love of the
Messiah”

The church as the

3:19b: “… so that you are

1:22-23 “and [God] placed him as head over all

new temple filled

filled up unto all of the

things in the church, which is his body, the filled

with God’s glory

fullness of God

up-ness of the one who fills all things in every

himself ”

way ”

Hyperlinks in Ephesians 3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).

Reflection Question
There are depths and dimensions of the love of God that are impossible to experience without regularly
surrounding ourselves with other followers of Jesus who are not like us. Identify one way that you can live this
out practically in your life.

Class Notes: Ephesians

88 of 134

