Session 26: The Meaning of “Head” in Ephesians 4:15

Key Takeaways
“Head” (kephale / κεφαλη) does not mean “authority” in ancient Greek. Its primary nuance of meaning is
(1) literal head, (2) literal source, and (3) metaphorical prominence.
Paul’s many references to Jesus as the head occur in contexts of his role as source and creator.

The Messiah as “the Head” (4:15)
This is the second time Paul uses this key word (aside from the verb in Ephesians 1:10, it appeared first in
Ephesians 1:22). The range of meaning for “head” in English is not the same for kephale (κεφαλη) in Greek.

Perspectives on the Word “Head” in Ancient Greek
Literal Head
Head does not mean authority in ancient Greek. Its primary nuance of meaning is (1) literal head, (2) literal
source, and (3) metaphorically prominent.

Leader
The Hebrew word head (‫ )ראש‬often refers to leaders, some 170 times. But the Greek Septuagint translation
only renders this word with the Greek word head (κεφαλη) six times out of 170! The fact that these Greek
speakers preferred other words (like ἀρχη = “ruler” and ἀρχηγος = “leader”) instead of using the Greek word

κεφαλη tells us that the word’s most common connotation was not leader but something else.
Source
“Authority is not a clearly established meaning of κεφαλη in the exhaustive ancient Greek lexicon by
Liddell-Scott-Jones. The Theological Dictionary of the New Testament concludes that ‘in ancient secular
[Greek] usage, κεφαλή is not employed for the head of a society.’”
Schlier, Heinrich (1964). Theological Dictionary of the New Testament. Eerdmans. 674.
Orphic Fragment (168): “Zeus is the head (κεφαλη), Zeus the middle, and from Zeus all things exist. ... ‘Head’
here clearly means ‘source,’ reinforced by the context that emphasized that through Zeus all creation
comes into existence.”

Class Notes: Ephesians

97 of 134

Payne, Philip Barton (2009). Man and Woman, One in Christ: An Exegetical and Theological Study of Paul's
Letters. Zondervan Academic. 126-127.

Body Functions
The physical head in ancient Greek thought was assumed to be the source of the body’s functions, the source
of information, perception, and provision for the entire body.
Source of Information and Perception
“For Hippocrates (of the Hippocratic oath) the ‘brain’ (ἐγκεφαλος) in the ‘head’ (κεφαλος) coordinates and
controls all parts of the body. ‘I hold that the brain is the most powerful organ of the human body, for when
it is healthy it is an interpreter to us of the phenomena caused by the air ... Eyes, ears, tongue, hands, and
feet act in accordance with the discernment of the brain.’”
Hippocrates (400 B.C.E.). The Sacred Disease. 178.
Source of Provision
“Hippocrates describes the head as the starting point of the four thickest pairs of veins in the body (σωμα).
From the head [they] reach to every part of the body and give nourishment (ἡ τροφη) and provide what the
body needs ... He is not supplanting the heart as the organ that pumps blood to all the parts of the body,
but rather stressing that the head controls the supply of blood to all the parts of the body.”
Arnold, Clinton E. (1994). “Jesus Christ: ‘Head’ of the Church (Colossians and Ephesians).” Jesus of Nazareth.
Eerdmans. 352.
Source of Semen in Males
“Semen is secreted, as Plato and Diocles say, from the brain and the spinal marrow, but Praxagoras,
Democritus, and Hippocrates say that it is secreted from the whole of the body.”
Durling, Richard (1973). A Dictionary of Medical Terms in Galen. Brill. 439.
Source of Nerves
Both perception and provision: Galen, a leading physician in the 2nd century C.E. summarized his tradition
regarding the head and the brain as the “source” (Grk. ἀρχη) of the nerves (Grk. νευρων), of all sensation and
voluntary motion, and of all will and motion.

Preeminent Source
In Jewish-Greek authors of the Second Temple period, the metaphorical word head was used primarily as an
image of preeminent source.
Of a man as progenitor of family: Philo of Alexandria calls Esau the head (κεφαλη) of his clan. “Like the head
(κεφαλη) of a living creature, Esau is the progenitor (γεναρχης) of the clans mentioned so far.”

Class Notes: Ephesians

98 of 134

Philo; Translated by Colson, F.H. and Whitaker, G.H. (1932). Philo Volume IV: On the Confusion of Tongues.
On the Migration of Abraham. Who Is the Heir of Divine Things? On Mating with the Preliminary Studies.
Harvard University Press. 61.
Of something that is the fundamental source of other things: The Ten Commandments “are the general
heads (κεφαλαια), embracing the vast multitude of particular laws, the roots (ῥιζαι), the sources (ἀρχαι), the
perpetual fountains (πηγαι) of the laws.”
Philo; Translated by Colson, F.H. and Whitaker, G.H. (1932). Philo Volume IV: On the Confusion of Tongues.
On the Migration of Abraham. Who Is the Heir of Divine Things? On Mating with the Preliminary Studies.
Harvard University Press. 120.
Life of Adam and Eve 19:3
the head (κεφαλη) of every sin
Sexual lust is called “the head,” meaning source and origin.

Jesus as the Head
Paul’s many references to Jesus occur in contexts of his role as source and creator of the things over which he
is the head.
Colossians 1:17-18 Instructor's Translation
17

He is before all things, and in him all things are held together;

18

he is the head (κεφαλη) of the body, the

church; he is the beginning/source (ἀρχη), the firstborn from among the dead ones.
Colossians 2:19 Instructor's Translation
[Jesus is] the head (κεφαλη) from which the entire body through its joints and bonds is supported and held
together and grows the growth of God.
Ephesians 4:15-16 NASB*
15

... the head, that is, Messiah,

16

from whom the entire body ... grows

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

1 Corinthians 11:3 NASB*
Messiah is the head of man, man is the head of woman, and God is the head of Messiah.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

“These three parallel lines are grossly misunderstood if ‘head’ is interpreted to mean ‘authority,’ (especially
the last line, which would result in the concept of the ‘eternal subordination’ of the Son to the Father), but
they make perfect sense when understood to mean source/origin: Messiah is the origin of humanity
(Messiah as Creator, as in 1 Cor. 8:4-6); man is the source/origin of woman (as in Genesis 2, alluded to later
in the paragraph in 1 Cor. 11:11-16); God is the origin of the Messiah (that is, the incarnation of the Son is sent
‘from’ the Father). This is how the line has been understood from an early period.”

Class Notes: Ephesians

99 of 134

Chrysostom, John; Translated by Chambers, Talbot W. (1889). “Homilies on First Corinthians” from Nicene
and Post-Nicene Fathers, First Series, Vol. 12. Christian Literature Publishing Co. 150-151.
Ephesians 5:22-23: Paul portrays the husband as the head of the wife primarily in terms of source as his
allusion to the Adam and Eve story shows (Eph. 5:31-33), where the woman was made out of the man.
“Adam is appropriately Eve’s ‘head’ by virtue of being her origin and source, and Eve in turn is his body, by
virtue of their unity as one flesh. From here, Paul finds an interpretive correlation between Eve created from
Adam and the traditional-cultural relationship between husbands and wives in the Roman world, where the
husband is the benefactor and patron of the wife, from whom she derives her identity and the necessities
of life.”
Westfall, Cynthia L. (2013). “’This Is a Great Metaphor!’ Reciprocity in the Ephesians Household Code."
Christian Origins and Greco-Roman Culture. Brill. 587.

Head as Source in Ephesians
In Ephesians 1, Paul describes Jesus’ resurrection and exaltation as elevating his status and becoming
the head (Eph. 1:10) of all things in Heaven and Earth. For the spiritual powers and authorities, this
means his subjection of and rule over them, so Paul draws upon the imagery of “being seated at God’s
right hand ... high above [them]” (Eph. 1:20). Whereas on Earth, Jesus is the head “of all things in the
church, which is his body.” The meaning of Jesus’ headship is described as an organic one, where he is
the source (= kephale) of the church’s origin and identity. This is spelled out in the following paragraphs
in chapter 2.
In Ephesians 2, Jesus is portrayed as the creator of the new humanity, that is, as its kephale. In
Ephesians 2:1-10, dead humans have been “made alive together” in the Messiah (Eph. 2:5) and “created
in Messiah Jesus” as God’s “workmanship” (Eph. 2:10). Then in Ephesians 2:11-22, Jews and Gentiles have
been “created into one new human” so that “the two are reconciled by one body” (Eph. 2:15-16). Once
again, the new humanity owes its existence and identity to the Messiah, and it’s this role that Paul
metaphorically calls kephale.
In Ephesians 4:11-16, Paul describes how the Messiah has given leaders as gifts to his people, to “build
up the body of the Messiah” (Eph. 4:12). Once again, the Messiah is the creator and sustainer of his
people who, as the receivers of such acts, are called “the body.” When the church is faithful to its
identity as the new humanity, they will “grow into him, who is the head, that is, the Messiah, from whom
the entire body is joined together and united together” (Eph. 4:15-16). Once again, the Messiah’s
headship is defined as being the source from which the body emerges as a unified whole.

Reflection Question
What are the three different possible meanings of the word “head” in ancient Greek? Which meaning seems
to be the best fit for Ephesians 4:15 and why?

Class Notes: Ephesians

100 of 134

