Session 17: The Powers in the Hebrew Scriptures

Key Takeaways
The concept of the powers is first found in Genesis 1:17 with the delegation of rule to spiritual beings.
In the Hebrew Bible, Israel is presented as a people group under the direct power and authority of God
the creator rather than other cosmic rulers.
When humanity is freed from slavery to the powers, there is no longer male or female, slave or free, Jew
or Greek. They become a people whose identities and destinies are no longer governed by the powers.

The Hebrew Bible Roots of the Powers Concept
The Hebrew Bible and Second Temple Judaism contain the roots for the concept of the powers. Paul is
continuing a long scriptural tradition of seeing Heaven and Earth as overlapping parallel realms (three-tiered
cosmos) and humanity as enslaved to supra-human powers that influence societies and communities.
“The host of heaven” whom God appoints to rule the order of time (Gen. 1; Job 38:6-7)
Genesis 1:14-18 NASB*
14

Then God said, “Let there be lights in the dome of the skies to separate the day from the night, and let

them be for signs and for seasons and for days and years;
heavens to give light on the earth”; and it was so.

16

to give light on the earth,

and let them be for lights in the expanse of the

God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the

day, and the lesser light to rule the night; and the stars.
18

15

17

God placed them in the expanse of the heavens

and to rule the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness.

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Genesis 2:1 Instructor's Translation
Thus the skies and the land were completed, with all of their hosts.
Psalm 136:7-9 NASB*
7

To him who made great lights,

for his lovingkindness is everlasting:
8

The sun to rule [ἐξουσιαν] the day,

for his lovingkindness is everlasting,
9

The moon and stars to rule [ἐξουσιαν] the night,

for his lovingkindness is everlasting.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Class Notes: Ephesians

65 of 134

The rebel cherub snake (Gen. 3; Ezek. 28)
The rebel sons of elohim (Gen. 6)
The rebellion of Babylon and the scattering of the nations (Gen. 11; Deut. 4:19-20, 32:7-8; Ps. 82; Isa. 14)
Deuteronomy 4:19-20 Instructor's Translation
19

So that you don’t lift your eyes to the heavens and see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the hosts

of the heavens, and be led astray and worship them and serve them, the ones whom Yahweh your God
designated for all the nations under the heavens.

20

But you, Yahweh has taken and he brought you out of

the iron furnace of Egypt, to be a people-inheritance for himself.
Deuteronomy 32:7-8 NASB*
7

Remember the days of old,

understand the years of past generations. ...
8

When Yahweh gave the nations their inheritances,

when he divided up the sons of humanity,
he established the boundaries of the peoples,
according to the number of the sons of the gods.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 82:1, 6-8 Instructor's Translation
1

God stands in the divine council,

in the midst of the gods he brings justice. ...
6

I had said, "Y’all are gods,

and all of you are sons of the Most High.
7

But on the contrary, y’all will die like humans

and like one of the rulers, y’all will fall."
8

Arise, O God, judge the land,

for you will inherit all the nations.
“This [idea in Deuteronomy] ... did justice to the reality of pagan religion and pagan political power with
which religion was inseparably associated. It was a common phenomenon in the ancient world for a deity
to be the personification of the state over which he [or she] presided. Under the successive domination of
Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome, Israel was to have ample opportunity to discover that the pagan
empires, whether they were symbolized by their earthly kings or by their heavenly guardians, were a power
to be reckoned with ... This teaching [in Deuteronomy] asserted that all authority ... comes ultimately from
the one God of Israel. Without some such teaching, it would have been all too easy for the pious Israelite to
assume that the Gentile nations lay outside the sphere of God’s kingly rule. In essence, therefore, the belief
in national angels was a courageous proclamation of the universal sovereignty of God ... the Jews never
really doubted that Gentile authority was derived from the Lord of all majesty and might, and that their
pagan oppressors had no power over them except what was given them from above.”
Caird, G. B. (2003). Principalities and Powers: A Study in Pauline Theology. Wipf and Stock Publishers. 6-7.

In the Exodus, Psalms, and the Prophets
Class Notes: Ephesians

66 of 134

The exodus was both a liberation from slavery to Egypt and a defeat of its elohim (Exod. 12:12, 15:11).
Exodus 12:12 Instructor's Translation
And I will pass through the land of Egypt on that night, and I will strike all the firstborn of the land of Egypt,
from human to beast, and I will bring acts of justice upon all the gods of Egypt.
Exodus 15:11 NASB*
Who is like you among the gods, Yahweh?
Who is like you, majestic in separateness,
feared in praises, doing wonders?
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The subordinated elohim are obligated to give honor to Yahweh.
Psalm 89:6-7 Instructor's Translation
6

Who in the heavens can be compared to Yahweh?

Who is like Yahweh among the sons of God,
7

a God feared in the assembly of the holy ones,

great and feared above all who surround him?
Psalm 29:1 Instructor's Translation
Give to Yahweh, O sons of God,
give to Yahweh glory and strength.
The past exodus anticipates a new exodus where God’s people will be rescued from the curse of the covenant
and enslavement to the spiritual powers that will be destroyed just like Egypt and its gods.
Isaiah 24:21-23 Instructor's Translation
21

And it will come about in that day,

Yahweh will bring judgment against the host of the heights on high
and against the kings of the land upon the land.
22

And prisoners are gathered over the pit,

and shut up in the prison,
and after many days they will be judged.
23

And the moon will be ashamed,

and the sun subject to humiliation,
for Yahweh of hosts reigns as king
on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,
and before his elders, glory!
Isaiah 27:1 Instructor's Translation
In that day, Yahweh will bring,
with his harsh and great and strong sword,
against Leviathan, the speedy snake,

Class Notes: Ephesians

67 of 134

against Leviathan, the twisting snake
and he will slay the sea-dragon who is in the sea.
Isaiah 34:2, 4 NASB*
2

Yahweh has anger against all the nations,

and wrath against all their hosts,
he has dedicated them to destruction ...
4

And all the hosts [δυναμεις] of the heavens will rot,

and the skies will be rolled up as a scroll,
and all their hosts will wither,
like a leaf withers from a vine,
and like it withers from a fig tree.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Greek Translation Connection
In the Old Greek translation, these spiritual beings are called powers, rulers, authorities, etc.
Psalm 148:1-4 Septuagint/LXX
1

Praise Yahweh ... from the heavens,

praise him among the high ones,
2

praise him all his angels,

praise him all his hosts [“all his powers” δυναμεις].
3

Praise him sun, moon,

praise him all stars of light.
4

Praise him O heavens of the heavens,

and the waters above the heavens.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 103:20-21 Septuagint/LXX
20

Bless Yahweh, O his angels.

Strong ones of might who do his word ...
21

Bless Yahweh, O all his hosts, [“all his powers” δυναμεις],

his servants who do his will.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Daniel 7:27 Septuagint/LXX
Then the rule and authority and greatness of the kingdoms under the heavens will be given to the people of
the holy ones of the most high ones, and his kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and all authorities [“authorities
and rulers” ἐξουσιαι και ἀρχαι] will worship and serve him.
Daniel 10:13 Septuagint/LXX
And the ruler [ἀρχων] of Persia stood against me.

Class Notes: Ephesians

68 of 134

Second Temple Roots
This close connection between the celestial bodies and spiritual rulers with delegated authority over the
cosmos permeates Second Temple Jewish literature.
Wisdom of Solomon 7:17-19 NRSV
17

For it is he [God] who gave me unerring knowledge of what exists, to know the structure of the world

[kosmos] and the activity of the elements [stoicheia]:
18

the beginning and end and middle of times, the alternations of the solstices and the changes of the

seasons [kairoi],
19

the cycles of the year [eniautos] and the constellations of the stars,

Wisdom of Solomon 13:1-3 NRSV
1

For all people who were ignorant of God ...

2

supposed that either fire or wind or swift air

or the circle of the stars, or turbulent water
or the luminaries of heaven were the gods [theoi] that rule the world.
3

If through delight in the beauty of these things people assumed them to be gods [theoi],

let them know how much better than these is their Lord,
for the author of beauty created them.
“God, being one, has about him an unspeakable number of powers, all of which are defenders and
preservers of every thing that is created; Again, it is by means of these powers that the incorporeal world,
perceptible by the intellect, has been put together, which is the archetypal model of this invisible world,
being compounded by invisible species, just as this world is of invisible bodies. (173) Some persons
therefore, admiring exceedingly the nature of both these worlds, have not only deified them in their wholes,
but have also deified the most beautiful parts of them, such as the sun and the moon, and the entire
heaven, which, having no reverence for anything, they have called gods. But Moses, perceiving their
design, says, “O Lord, Lord, King of the gods” (Deut. 10:17) in order to show the difference between the
ruler and those subject to him, (174) “And there is also in the air a most sacred company of incorporeal
souls as an attendant upon the heavenly beings; for the word of prophecy is accustomed to call these souls
angels. It happens therefore that the whole host of each of these worlds, being marshalled in their suitable
ranks, are servants and ministers of the ruler who has marshalled them, whom they follow as their leader, in
obedience to the principles of law and justice; seeing at once what is becoming, both for himself and for
his works of creation, there are some things which he has entrusted to his subordinate powers to fashion;
and yet he has not at once given even to them completely independent knowledge to enable it to
accomplish their objects, in order that no one of those things which come to be created may be found to
be erroneously made.”
Philo of Alexandria (De Vita Contempletiva)
“... [B]ut Moses differs from [the Gentiles] widely in their opinion of God, not intimating that either the world
itself, or the soul of the world, is the original God, nor that the stars or their motions are the primary causes
of the events which happen among men. Rather, Moses teaches that this universe is held together by
invisible powers, which the Creator has spread from the extreme borders of the earth to heaven, making a

Class Notes: Ephesians

69 of 134

beautiful provision to prevent what he has joined together from being dissolved; for the indissoluble chains
which bind the universe are his powers.”
Philo of Alexandria (De Vita Contempletiva)
“From of old you appointed the Prince of light to assist us, and in [his] ha[nd] are all the angels of [just]ice,
and all the spirits of truth are under his dominion. You made Belial for the pit, angel of enmity; in dark[ness]
is his [dom]ain, his counsel is to bring about wickedness and guilt. All the spirits of his lot are angels of
destruction, they walk in the laws of darkness.”
Dead Sea Scrolls (4QMMT)

Reflection Question
Deuteronomy 32:8-9 can present a different way of understanding the Tower of Babel (Babylon), as well as the
overall story of the Bible. What are some of your thoughts, reflections, or questions about this?

Class Notes: Ephesians

70 of 134

