Class Notes: Ephesians
133 of 134
Session 35: Reflecting on the Armor of God
Key Takeaways
The snake is always present when we choose between the old humanity and the new humanity. 
The powers want to persuade us that our real identity, value, and destiny is based on something other
than Jesus’ death and resurrection, the gift of his Spirit, and our unity as the new humanity. We resist
the powers with the true reality of Jesus.
Truth is not an idea that you need to learn. Truth is a person you must encounter.
Conclusion: Translation and Literary Design of Ephesians 6:21-24
Ephesians 6:21-24. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).
Resources on Ephesians
Commentaries
General and accessible, comments paragraph by paragraph:
N. T. Wright, Paul for Everyone: The Prison Letters: Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon
More detailed, comments verse by verse in expositional form:
Ben Witherington III, The Letters to Philemon, the Colossians, and the Ephesians: A Socio-Rhetorical
Commentary on the Captivity Epistles
John Stott, The Message of Ephesians (The Bible Speaks Today)
Other Books on Ephesians
Timothy G. Gombis, The Drama of Ephesians: Participating in the Triumph of God
Resources on the Household Code of Ephesians 5
21 So that y’all also might know how things are with me,
what I’m doing,
Tychicus will make everything known to y’all,
that beloved brother
and faithful servant in the Lord,
22 whom I sent to y’all for this reason,
so that y’all might know how things are with us
and that he might comfort y’all’s hearts.
23 Peace to the brothers and sisters,
and love
with faith,
from God the Father
and from Lord Jesus the Messiah.
24 Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Messiah
with incorruptible [love].

Class Notes: Ephesians
134 of 134
Cynthia Long Westfall, Paul and Gender: Reclaiming the Apostle’s Vision for Men and Women in Christ
Philip Barton Payne, Man and Woman, One in Christ
Introductions to Paul
Michael Gorman, Apostle of the Crucified Lord: A Theological Introduction to Paul and His Letters
Timothy G. Gombis, Paul: A Guide for the Perplexed
N. T. Wright, Paul: A Biography
E. Randolph Richards, Paul and First-Century Letter Writing: Secretaries, Composition, and Collection
Reflection Question
Read the last four verses of the letter to the Ephesians (Eph. 6:21-24). Now that you’ve reached the end of the
letter and the class, how would you summarize the main idea of the book of Ephesians? Try to keep it to just a
few sentences.
