Session 4: Reflecting on the Introduction to
Ephesians

Key Takeaways
God’s ultimate purpose and plan is to unify Heaven and Earth in the Messiah. This idea is the framework
for the whole book of Ephesians.

Who Is Paul Addressing?
In Ephesians 1:1, Paul addresses his letter to “the holy ones” (Greek: ἁγιοις). This important term is usually
translated “saints,” which results in English readers missing the full theological significance of this term.
Holiness (Hebrew: qadosh / Greek: hagios) is first and foremost an attribute of God, defined as his unique,
one-of-a-kind otherness by virtue of his status as the Creator and source of all reality.
Isaiah 6:3 Instructor’s Translation
... “Holy, holy, holy is Yahweh God the mighty, the whole land is the fullness of his glory.”
In the twin realms of Heaven and Earth, God has two parallel families of image-bearing representatives, the
spiritual beings (“the host of heaven” in Gen. 2:1) and the human rulers on the land (Gen. 1:26-28). Both
families are invited into God’s presence to share in his holy status.

Israel as the Holy Ones
Israel is called to be a holy nation (Exod. 19:6). When they are faithful to the covenant and have access to
God’s presence in the temple, they become “holy ones.” “I am Yahweh your God, and you will make
yourselves holy, and you shall be holy ones (ἁγιοι) for I am a holy one (ἁγιος)” (Lev. 11:44, 19:2, 20:7, 26;
Num. 15:40).

Spiritual Beings as Holy Ones
Spiritual beings are also referred to as “holy ones” (ἁγιοι) in the Hebrew Bible (Zech. 14:5; Ps. 89:5-8; Dan. 8:24
).
Psalm 89:5 Septuagint/LXX
The heavens will praise your wonders, Yahweh,
Even your faithfulness, in the assembly of the holy ones (ἐκκλησίᾳ ἁγίων).

Class Notes: Ephesians

10 of 134

Psalm 89:7 Septuagint/LXX
God is greatly feared in the council of his holy ones (ἁγιων) ...
Paul assigns the terminology of God’s divine heavenly council to those who trust in the Messiah. Jesus the
human Messiah has been exalted over the divine council to rule Heaven and Earth (Eph. 1:19-21), and that
same status has been granted to his followers (Eph. 2:5-6).

The Space of the Heavens and the Earth. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Ephesians (2019).

Reflection Question
The apocalypse in Ephesians is about the reconciliation of all things, as well as the enthronement of humans
with the Messiah. How can understanding these apocalypses as present realities change how you view your
life in the here and now?

Class Notes: Ephesians

11 of 134

Module 2: The Design of
Ephesians
SESSIONS 5-7
Venture into the exquisite literary design and symmetry of Ephesians 1-3.

Class Notes: Ephesians

12 of 134

