Session 16: Paul’s View of the Powers

Key Takeaways
In the New Testament, the powers are both heavenly and earthly, divine and human, spiritual and
political, invisible and structural.
Paul sees the cosmic rulers (spiritual beings) as being invested in the political, ethnic, gendered, and
socioeconomic structures of our world.
Paul sees spiritual beings as intimately connected to the earthly entities (rulers, social structures, etc.)
who work to divide and corrupt what God has intended to unify.
Enslavement to the powers is the human condition apart from the messianic hope.

Rulers, Authorities, Powers, and Dominions
The “rulers, authorities, powers, and dominions” are introduced in the first chapter of Ephesians (Eph. 1:21).
Who or what are they?

The Heavenly/Spiritual Realm
In Ephesians, these powers exist in the parallel heavenly/spiritual realm, and evidence of their work is found in
corporate human societies, institutions, and cultural ideologies.
Ephesians 1:20-21 Instructor's Translation
20

Christ ... is seated at [God’s] right hand in the heavenly realm,

21

far above all rule and authority, and

power and dominion ... not only in this age, but also in the age to come.
Ephesians 2:2 Instructor's Translation
... the age of this world, the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit who is now working among the sons of
disobedience ...
Ephesians 3:10 NASB
... the rulers and authorities in the heavenly places.
Ephesians 6:12 Instructor's Translation
... not flesh and blood, but the rulers, authorities, the cosmic powers of this present darkness, the evil
spiritual beings in the heavenly realm.

The Slanderer

Class Notes: Ephesians

57 of 134

In Paul’s letter, the powers are related to, but distinct from, the role of “the satan” (the opposer), or “the devil”
(the slanderer), who is said to influence people primarily on the individual and community level.
Ephesians 4:26-27 Instructor's Translation
26

Don’t let the sun go down on your anger,

27

so you don’t give a place to the slanderer.

The Influence of the Powers
In Paul’s other letters, the influence of the powers is at work on a corporate level in social, political, cultural,
and religious systems.
Colossians 1:16 Instructor's Translation
All things were created in him, things in the heavens and things on earth, the visible and invisible, whether
thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities, all things were created through him and for him.
Colossians 2:8 Instructor's Translation
They take you away captive through philosophies and empty deception, in accordance with human
traditions and the elemental powers of the cosmos, not in accordance with the Messiah.
Colossians 2:15 Instructor's Translation
After disarming the rulers and authorities, he exposed them to public shame, triumphing over them in the
Messiah.
Galatians 1:3-4 Instructor's Translation
3

... Jesus Messiah,

4

who gave himself on behalf of our sins in order to rescue us from the present evil age.

Galatians 4:3 Instructor's Translation
We ... were enslaved under the elemental powers of the cosmos.
Galatians 4:8-9 Instructor's Translation
8

... you were enslaved to what by nature were not gods.

9

... the weak and impoverished elemental powers

1 Corinthians 2:6, 8 Instructor's Translation
6

... the rulers of this age who are passing away; ...

8

the rulers of this age ... who, if they did know [the

wisdom of God] they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
1 Corinthians 15:24-26 Instructor's Translation
24

When [the Messiah] hands over the kingdom to God and Father, when he nullifies every rule and

authority and power,

25

for it is necessary that he rule until he has placed all enemies under his feet;

26

the

last enemy to be nullified is death.
Romans 8:38-39 Instructor's Translation

Class Notes: Ephesians

58 of 134

38

Neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers nor the present nor the future nor powers ...

39

nor anything

in all creation will be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Messiah Jesus our Lord.

The Satan
The devil (“slanderer”), or the satan (“the one opposed”), works on the individual and community level.
1 Thessalonians 2:18 NASB*
... we desired to come to you ... but the satan hindered us.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

1 Thessalonians 3:5 Instructor's Translation
I sent to know more about your faithfulness, lest somehow the tester test you
Romans 16:20 NASB*
The God of peace is soon to crush the satan under y’all’s [the Roman house churches] feet.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The Concept of “The Powers” in the Wider New Testament
The Earthly Powers
John 12:31, 42 ESV*
31

Now is the judgment of this world, now the ruler (archon) of this world will be cast outside. ...

42

Nevertheless, even many of the rulers (archonton) believed in Jesus ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Luke 22:52-53 Instructor's Translation
52

Jesus said to the ruling priests (arch-hiereis) and commanders (strategois) of the temple and the elders,

53

"... this is your hour, and of the authority (exousia) of darkness."

Romans 13:1 NIV*
Let every person submit themselves to the governing authorities (exousiais).
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Romans 8:38-39 NASB*
38

For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers (archon), nor things present, nor

things to come, nor powers (dunameis),

39

nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able

to separate us from the love of God, which is in Messiah Jesus our Lord.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Class Notes: Ephesians

59 of 134

These statements express a worldview in which the realities that we consider separate (spiritual vs. material)
are unified and interconnected.

The Visible and Invisible
If you consider all of the uses of “power” vocabulary in the New Testament, you discover that the powers are
both heavenly and earthly, divine and human, spiritual and political, invisible and structural.
Colossians 1:16 Instructor's Translation
For in [the messianic Son] all things were created, things in the heavens and things on the earth, things
visible and things invisible, whether thrones or territories of dominion, whether rulers or authorities, all
things were created by him and for him.
The parallelism makes clear that Paul saw these powers as both earthly and heavenly, visible and invisible,
with manifestations that are both human and supra-human, material and non-material. This means that
whenever the New Testament authors speak of power, they are referring to a power that is both of Heaven and
Earth, material and spiritual.

Key Terms for Power
Archon/Arche, ruler/rule: A specific person who is in a role of authorized authority, power, and
widespread influence, mostly kings and officials of a monarchy or priests and officials of a temple
Exousia, authority: A structure or social arrangement that is upheld and represented by an authorized
person or group
Dunamis, power: The real or potential influence manifest in military, political, or economic institutions
or officials who represent them
Thronos, throne: The symbol of institutional or structural authority or power associated with an
institution (metaphorically refers to a structure of power, not a particular person)
Kuriotes, dominion/lordship: The sphere or territory of a ruler’s power or influence

Key Texts for Power
Key Pauline texts illuminate the reality of the powers.
1 Corinthians 2:6-8 NASB*
6

We [the apostles] speak of a wisdom among those who are mature; a wisdom, however, not of this age

nor of the rulers of this age, who are passing away;

7

rather, we speak of God’s wisdom, the open-secret

which has been hidden, which God predestined before the ages for our exaltation to glory;

8

[a wisdom]

that none of the rulers of this age understood; for if they had understood it they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The New Testament is clear that it was human rulers (archon) that crucified Jesus. “The chief priests
(archiereis) and rulers (archon) delivered Jesus over to death and crucified him” (Luke 24:20). So at the very
least, 1 Corinthians 2:6-8 includes Jewish and Roman religious, military, and political leaders and the
institutions they represent (the temple and the empire).

Class Notes: Ephesians

60 of 134

However, to call Caiaphas and Pilate “the rulers of this age,” that is, of this entire world order, is extreme.
Additionally, none of them were still in office when Paul wrote to the Corinthians. He speaks of these powers
in the present as still existing.
Later, when Paul speaks of Jesus’ death and resurrection, he again mentions the powers in 1 Corinthians 15:2426.
1 Corinthians 15:24-26 NASB*
24

Then [will come] the completion, when [Messiah] hands over the kingdom to the God and Father, when

he has disempowered all rule (arche) and all authority (exousia) and power (dunamis).
until he has put all his enemies under his feet.

26

25

For he must reign

The last enemy that will be disempowered is death.

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The key verb “disempowered” (katargeo) does not mean “destroy” (as in the ESV, NRSV, and NIV); rather, it
means “neutralize” and/or “make null and void” (see 1 Cor. 1:28; Eph. 2:15; Rom. 4:14). Paul’s point is that every
human and cosmic structure of authority governing human existence in this current age of death and decay
will have to be subdued in order to make way for the new creation.

Literary Design of Romans 8:35-39

35 Who will separate us from the love of Christ?

Human Powers
35b Will tribulation, or distress,

or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or sword?

36-37 Just as it is written,

“For your sake we are being put to death all day long;
we were considered as sheep to be slaughtered.”
But in all these things we overwhelmingly conquer through him who loved us.

Cosmic Powers
38-39a For I am convinced that

not death, not life,
not angels, not rulers (archon),
not things present, not things to come,
not powers (dunamis),
not height, nor depth,

Class Notes: Ephesians

61 of 134

not any other creature,

39b will be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Romans 8:35-39. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians (2019).
The rhetorical logic is that no creature in God’s world, however rebellious and hostile to his purposes, can
overpower the divine love expressed by the death and resurrection of Jesus. The hostile powers include
human violence and opposition but also the corresponding cosmic powers who are responsible for suffering
and death on a corporate, structural level. Notice that the cosmic powers in particular are called “creatures,”
that is, they have a proper role in God’s world, though they are presently alienated from that role in their
attempt to separate people from the creator’s love.
Ephesians 1:20-23 NASB*
20

[God] brought about in the Messiah, when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand

in the heavenlies,

21

far above all rule (archon) and authority (exousia) and power (dunamis) and dominion

(kuriotes), and every name that is named, not only in this age but also in the one to come.
things in subjection under his feet, and gave him as head over all things to the church,

23

22

And he put all

which is his body,

the fullness of him who fills all in all.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The Messiah’s heavenly rule is not only over the cosmic/heavenly powers, because Paul specifies that all
powers, which includes Heaven and Earth (Col. 1:16), are placed under his rule.
The image of the risen Jesus at God’s right hand is derived from a combination of Psalm 8 and Psalm 110 (see
Mark 14:62 and Matt. 28:18).

The Powers in Paul’s Worldview
“In Paul’s first-century worldview, nothing in heaven can happen without profound repercussions on earth;
indeed, that is the way true change on earth is brought about. Nor would the message of peace in heaven
constitute much ‘good news’ for those seeking deliverance here on earth. No, the use of ‘all ... every ... all
things’ here is uncompromising in its breadth. No human or cosmic power in this world or the world to
come is exempted.”
Adapted from Wink, Walter (1984). Naming the Powers: The Language of Power in the New Testament.
Fortress Press. 60.
“If Christ is lord not only of persons but also of the powers, if his sovereignty extends beyond the individual
to the social structures and spiritual influences that organize the world, it also extends to the very
constituent principles of the physical universe itself, encompassing what we call the ‘laws of nature.’ This is
what leads Paul to the phrase from Isaiah, 'new creation.'”

Class Notes: Ephesians

62 of 134

Adapted from Wink, Walter (1984). Naming the Powers: The Language of Power in the New Testament.
Fortress Press.
“[I]t is probable that Paul means by principalities and powers those institutions and structures by which
earthly matters and invisible realms are administered, and without which no human life is possible. The
superior power of nature epitomized by life and death; the ups and downs of historic processes; the nature
and impact of favored prototypes or the catastrophic burdens of the past; the hope or threat offered to the
present by the future; the might of capitalists, rulers, judges; the benefit and onus of laws of tradition and
custom; the distinction and similarity of political and religious practices; the weight of ideologies and
prejudices; the conditions under which all authority, labor, parenthood, etc., thrive or are crushed—these
structures and institutions are in Paul’s mind ... God’s creation obviously does not consist of earthly-visible
things alone. Just as Genesis 1:1 treats the creation of the heavens and the earth, so also in Colossians 1:16
‘invisible things in heavens’ are added to those that are tangible. In the latter verse, either both or only the
invisible things are identified with the powers. It is probable that in Ephesians Paul had in mind at the same
time both visible, specific governors and the invisible authority exerted by them; concrete conditions and
manifestations of life and the invisible mystery of the psyche; specific legal acts and the overarching role of
law in general, etc. According to Ephesians 1:10, both the heavenly and the earthly entities are subjected to
Christ. Only when both are affected is the whole creation changed.”
Barth, Markus (1974). Ephesians 1-3. Doubleday & Co. 174-175.
“Paul considers the celestial bodies (also called ‘the elements’ in Galatians 4:1-8), to be personalized
spiritual forces of some kind, supernatural beings that hold power over human beings ... [he] has in mind
the tribal deities that were thought to oversee the nations on behalf of God (as in Deut 32:8-9) ... but this
purpose deteriorated. These same regulating beings are what is meant in Ephesians as kosmokratoras (
Eph 6:12), ‘cosmic rulers.’ But the metaphor in this word contains an ambiguity. On the one hand, they can
be said to ‘hold’ (krateo) the world (kosmos), administering justice and order on behalf of God; on the other
hand, their holding might easily become a ‘grab’ (krateo), in which they seek to detract attention from the
true creator God and establish themselves as the ultimate in divine power and authority ... These are the
‘spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places’ (Eph 6:11-12).”
Longenecker, Bruce (1998). The Triumph of Abraham’s God: The Transformation of Identity in Galatians.
Abingdon Press. 49, 54-55.
“The complex structures of our societies set limits to what we can see, understand, and choose to do. We
are caught in the web of relationships, expectations, economies, cultural activities, acculturation to
particular contexts, political and administrative arrangements which seem seem to take on a life of their
own, larger and more enduring, and more resistant than the efforts of any individual or group of individuals
to change or act in opposition to such forces. Here then is the concrete presence of the ‘sin’ which Paul
describes, the force for evil that precedes the choices of those who appear to be choosing, preempts the
actions of those who appear to be acting, and tends to crush out of existence any who persist in acting in
critical opposition.”
Domning, Daryl P. and Hellwig, Monika K. (2006). Original Selfishness: Original Sin and Evil in the Light of
Evolution. Routledge. 16.

Class Notes: Ephesians

63 of 134

Paul envisions these cosmic rulers, or elemental powers, as spiritual beings invested in (what we call) the
political, ethnic, gender, and socioeconomic structures that divide humans and assign greater or lesser value
to various groups, resulting in corporate and individual sin, oppression, and injustice. In Galatians, Ephesians,
Colossians, and Romans, it is these powers that have been conquered and overcome in the exaltation of the
crucified Messiah.
“Paul’s vision of the ultimate rescue of the entire created order ... a vision which flowed directly from what
he believed about the Messiah, impelled him to understand ‘evil’ as a whole which was more than the sum
total of humans sins or deaths. Rather, ‘sin’ and ‘death’ were themselves suprahuman forces bent on
corrupting and destroying the creator’s good world ... Based on Paul’s language about the ‘powers’ the
promise is both personal (the heart infected by sin, corrupting the mind into idolatry and the person into
dehumanizing behavior) and cosmic, since the worship of idols allows the demons who masquerade
behind them to gain power that is not rightly theirs ... Sin and Death have replaced, in Paul’s mind, the
wicked, idolatrous pagans as seen from within his pre-Christian worldview. Sin and death are the real
enemies to be defeated, and indeed they have been defeated on the cross and will be defeated fully and
finally in Jesus’ coming.”
Wright, N.T. (2013). Paul and the Faithfulness of God. Fortress Press. 756.

Reflection Question
The powers are the human and cosmic authorities who are responsible for division. How does this relate to
Paul’s message in the letter to the Ephesians?

Class Notes: Ephesians

64 of 134

