Session 27: People as Gifts in Ephesians 4

Key Takeaways
Leaders of the Church are not appointed based on the Greco-Roman categories of worth and honor.
Rather, their ability to lead is a gift given in grace, and their purpose is to build up God’s people so they
can be Christ’s body in the world.

Spiritual Gifts in the New Testament
In Ephesians 4:11-12, the gifts are leaders whose abilities sustain and guide the unity of God’s people. They
“build up” (a temple metaphor) God’s people so they can do the work (recall Eph. 2:10) of service.
Paul reshapes the very concept of leadership and influence in contrast to the Greco-Roman systems of honor
and status. Those who lead in the messianic body are not installed on the basis of traditional categories of
worth/honor. Rather, even their ability to lead (as apostles, evangelists, teachers, etc.) is a gift that they did
not earn but were given in God’s mercy.
“Every believer is to reckon himself or herself dependent upon the single gift of divine mercy: Believers
cannot boast as if there were something about themselves that rendered them worthy of the divine call. Regrounded in the mercy of God, they are able to perceive their differentiated roles within the believercommunity as divinely distributed gifts. Just as Paul’s authority to instruct as an apostle is a product of
'grace/gift' (χὰρις), so each of them has a 'gift' (δὸσις) given to them ... Within this community, honor does
not have to be sought: All the honor that counts has already been given, or will be given by God. Freed
from the need to establish their honor in competition ... believers can afford to grant it to others.”
Barclay, John M. G. (2015). Paul and the Gift. Eerdmans. 510.

Verse

Spiritual Gifts

Reference

Romans 12:6–8

1. Prophecy

Romans 12:5-6: “Thus we the many are one body in

2. Serving

Messiah, and each one is a member of another.

3. Teaching

And having graces/gifts (χαρισματα) according the

4. Exhortation

grace/gift which was given to us.”

5. Giving

List of Spiritual Gifts in New Testament. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians
(2019).

Class Notes: Ephesians

101 of 134

Verse

Spiritual Gifts

Reference

6. Leadership
7. Mercy

1 Corinthians

1. Word of wisdom

1 Corinthians 12:4, 7, 12: “Varieties of gifts/graces (

12:8–10

2. Word of knowledge

χαρισματων), but the same Spirit … but to each one

3. Faith

was given the revealing of the Spirit for the

4. Gifts of healings

common good. … Just as the body is one, and has

5. Miracles

many members, but all the members of the body,

6. Prophecy

though being many, are one body, so also it is with

7. Distinguishing between

the Messiah.”

spirits
8. Tongues
9. Interpretation of tongues

1 Corinthians

1. Apostle

12:28

2. Prophet
3. Teacher
4. Miracles
5. Kinds of healings
6. Helps
7. Administration
8. Tongues

Ephesians 4:11

1. Apostle

Ephesians 4:7: “And to each one of us grace/gift (

2. Prophet

χαρις) was given, according to the measure of the

3. Evangelist

generous gift of the Messiah.”

4. Pastor
5. Teacher

1 Peter 4:11

1. Whoever speaks

1 Peter 4:10: “Each one, just as he has received a

2. Whoever renders service

grace/gift (χαρισμα), using it to serve one another,
as good stewards of the diversified grace (χαριτος)
of God.”

List of Spiritual Gifts in New Testament. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ephesians
(2019).

Definitions of Spiritual Gifts in New Testament
Apostle
Apostle, when capitalized, means those who saw the risen Jesus and were commissioned by him. This word is
used to refer to the twelve disciples (Matt. 10:2, Mark 3:14) and the others who saw Jesus, like James (Gal. 1:19)

Class Notes: Ephesians

102 of 134

and Paul (Gal. 1:1).
In general use, an apostle is a passionate initiator of spreading the good news and leading new efforts of
church planting and building in new centers of ministry. It is used to refer to leaders in the early Jesus
movement who helped initiate new ministry projects, like Andronicus and Junia (Rom. 16:7) and Barnabas (
Acts 14:14).

Prophet
Prophets are people steeped in the Scriptures and in the nuances of the present cultural moment, who can
discern the will of God for specific people/communities and address them with authority.
In 1 Corinthians 14, Paul does not describe prophecy as “ecstatic speech.” Rather, the prophet has control of
their faculties (14:32), and prophecy engages the mind (14:15, 19). It requires thought and mental engagement.
This does not seem like ecstatic speech. It’s equated with instruction (katekhesis, 14:19), and it helps people
learn (manthano, 14:31) and be encouraged (parakaleo, 14:31).
“Prophesying in Paul’s theology is the performing of intelligible, articulate speech acts which depend on
the active agency of the Holy Spirit mediated through human minds and lives to build up, encourage,
exhort, and comfort others in the context of interpersonal relations.”
Thistelton, Anthony C. (2013). The First Epistle to the Corinthians (The New International Greek Testament
Commentary). Eerdmans. 1 Cor 14:2.

Evangelist
Someone who is able to share the good news about Jesus in a uniquely effective way.
The noun is used only to describe Philip of Caesarea (Acts 21:8) and Timothy (2 Tim. 4:5), but the verb is
simply “to announce good news,” which widens the reference considerably.

Pastor
Pastor literally means “shepherd,” someone who cares about and can effectively guide the spiritual growth of
a community of disciples.
Jesus is described as the “head pastor” of the universal church (1 Pet. 2:25, 5:4). The noun is used only here,
whereas the verb is used of church leaders “to shepherd” (1 Pet. 5:2; Acts 20:28). In the New Testament, this
refers to an activity, not the title of an office.

Teacher
A teacher is someone with growing knowledge of the Scriptures and the story of Jesus, who is able to explain
and help people adopt a Christian imagination and its corresponding lifestyle.
Teachers are listed after apostles and prophets in 1 Corinthians 12:28. Their role seems to be connected to the
passing on and explication of doctrines and traditions of the church (cf. Rom. 6:17; 1 Cor. 4:17; Col. 2:7).

Class Notes: Ephesians

103 of 134

Teachers appear to be central in the growth in wisdom and knowledge that Paul desires for the Ephesians in
1:17–19 and 3:18–19. (For more, see Stephen E. Fowl, Ephesians: A Commentary, 141.)

Reflection Question
According to “the powers,” giftedness would be something to pursue and bolster in order to receive personal
honor. But Paul has a different view of spiritual gifts. According to Paul, what is the purpose of the gifts in
Ephesians 4?

Class Notes: Ephesians

104 of 134

