Session 4: A Mature Body

Key Takeaways
The divisions among the Corinthian churches are evidence to Paul that the community is still immature
and unwilling to embrace life in the Spirit.
God is building his temple through the people of God; he causes the growth, but the community of
Jesus' followers participates with God in that work.
God calls us to be childlike in our acceptance of and need for him but mature in our emotions and
relationships so that we mirror Christ to one another.
Mature followers of Jesus are willing to answer God’s call, surrender to his will, and exercise faith,
believing and acting with trust that God will do what he said he would do.

1 Corinthians 3:1-4
How does Paul address their bad behavior?
Paul makes a reference to himself as one who gives “milk” and not solid food. This would have conjured up
images for them of breastfeeding and mothers or wet nurses. There are other letters in which Paul refers to
himself in female terms.
In Galatians 4:19, he says he is in the pain or pangs of childbirth (Greek: odino/ὠδίνω).
In 1 Thessalonians 2:6-7, he uses the word θάλπω (Greek: thalpo), which means to cherish, nurture, comfort,
warm up. Paul says to the Thessalonians that he could have thrown around his weight as an apostle, but he
was gentle among them as a nursing mother would cherish her own children.
In Ephesians 5:29, he uses this word with the word ἐκτρέφω (Greek: ektrepho—nourish, feed) with reference to
how a husband should look after his wife and how Christ looks after the church.
In chapter 4, he talks about being a father to them which is also language he frequently uses. Paul casts
himself as a parent of his churches.

The Servant of God
What does it mean to be a servant of God? To Paul, a συνεργός (Greek: sunergos), or co-worker, is one who
works together with other workers and a co-worker with God. He and Apollos are friends who work together;
they have a “common purpose” i.e., they are not divided, but of one mind.
Though it is God’s own work, being co-workers means that we work! Paul and the other apostles plant and
water, but it is God who gives growth.

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

27 of 81

The Temple of God
Note all the different metaphors Paul uses that all pile up on each other: parenting, weaning children,
agriculture, temple pictures, and judgment.
God is building his temple through the people of God. This is God’s work and he is building it, but what we
contribute matters. Our contribution lies in the motives of our hearts. In 1 Corinthians 4:5, Paul talks about
being judged on the motives of our hearts which will be brought into the light by God.
1 Corinthians 3:14-15 NRSV
14

If what has been built on the foundation survives, the builder will receive a reward.

15

If the work is

burned, the builder will suffer loss; the builder will be saved, but only as through fire.
Paul addresses them as a group.
1 Corinthians 3:16-17 NRSV*
16

Do you not know that you [plural] are God’s temple and that God’s Spirit dwells in you [plural]?

17

If

anyone destroys God’s temple [singular], God will destroy that person. For God’s temple is holy, and you
[plural] are that temple.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Then he switches to the first person in 1 Corinthians 3:18-23: “Let no one deceive himself/herself.”
Here the verb is singular, and there is a reflexive element to this of allowing oneself to be deceived. It’s not
clear who he is addressing here, but he seems to be warning them to take responsibility for themselves.
1 Corinthians 3:21-23 NRSV
21

So let no one boast about human leaders. For all things are yours,

22

whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas

or the world or life or death or the present or the future—all belong to you,

23

and you belong to Christ, and

Christ belongs to God.
What do you think he means by “all things are yours”?

1 Corinthians 4: Who’s Judging Whom?
“Judgement and praise were significant issues in Roman culture. Certain innate attributes were generally
considered honourable or praiseworthy—ancestry, gender, ethnicity; but these could be enhanced,
destroyed, or bypassed by public actions that attracted praise or blame—such as benefaction or oratory. …
The wise person’s disregard of human judgments is a theme of Stoicism. … However, Paul will not allow his
apparent indifference to be interpreted in a Stoic manner; his reasoning is explicitly theological and
eschatological.”
Malcolm, Matthew R. (2012). The World of 1 Corinthians: An Exegetical Source Book of Literary and Visual
Backgrounds. 1368.

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

28 of 81

1 Corinthians 5:12-13 NIV
12

What business is it of mine to judge those outside the church? Are you not to judge those inside?

13

God

will judge those outside. “Expel the wicked person from among you.”
1 Corinthians 4:6 NIV
Now, brothers and sisters, I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, so that you
may learn from us the meaning of the saying, “Do not go beyond what is written.” Then you will not be
puffed up in being a follower of one of us over against the other.
“Do not go beyond what is written” in 4:6 is unclear. There is no real consensus on this.

Paul contrasts the Corinthians—rich, kings, wise, strong, and honored—with the apostles—last of all,
sentenced to death, a spectacle to the world, fools, weak, held in disrepute, hungry, thirsty, poorly clothed,
beaten, homeless, and weary from work.
1 Corinthians 4:12b-13 NRSV
12

... When reviled, we bless; when persecuted, we endure;

13

when slandered, we speak kindly. We have

become like the rubbish of the world, the dregs of all things, to this very day.

Loving, Gentle, Fatherly Admonition
God calls us to be childlike in our acceptance of him and our need for him but mature in our emotions and
our relationships so that we mirror Christ to one another.
1 Corinthians 4:12b-13 NRSV
14

I am not writing this to make you ashamed, but to admonish you as my beloved children.

15

For though

you might have ten thousand guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers. Indeed, in Christ Jesus I
became your father through the gospel.

16

I appeal to you, then, be imitators of me.

17

For this reason I sent

you Timothy, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, to remind you of my ways in Christ Jesus, as I
teach them everywhere in every church.
become arrogant.

19

18

But some of you, thinking that I am not coming to you, have

But I will come to you soon, if the Lord wills, and I will find out not the talk of these

arrogant people but their power.

20

For the kingdom of God depends not on talk but on power.

21

What

would you prefer? Am I to come to you with a stick, or with love in a spirit of gentleness?
Paul admonishes the Corinthians that they might become mature followers of Jesus who demonstrate a
willingness to answer God’s call, who surrender to his will, and who have faith—believing that God is going to
do what he said he would do and acting accordingly.

Reflection Question
What are a few of the key signs of Christlike maturity according to Paul?

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

29 of 81

