Session 17: Possible Solutions

Key Takeaways
Interpretations of this passage could be categorized by whether it is dealing with head coverings or
hairstyles and by whether it is teaching a hierarchy or not.
Most scholars agree that 1 Corinthians 11:6 is a reductio ad absurdum argument.

Interpreting 1 Corinthians 11:2-16
A good place to start with interpreting a difficult passage is to simply map the possible solutions to the
problems that are currently offered by scholars. This material won’t go through each point in detail, but all the
different positions can be found summarized in Women and Worship at Corinth (Peppiatt, 2015).
“[T]his passage is probably the most complex, controversial, and opaque of any text of comparable length
in the New Testament. A survey of the history of interpretation reveals how many different exegetical
options there are for a myriad of questions and should inspire a fair measure of tentativeness on the part of
the interpreter.”
Blomberg, Craig (1994). 1 Corinthians: NIV Application Commentary. Zondervan. 214.
“Along with these larger contextual questions, this passage is full of notorious exegetical difficulties,
including (1) the ‘logic’ of the argument as a whole, which in turn is related to (2) our uncertainty about the
meaning of some absolutely crucial terms and (3) our uncertainty about prevailing customs, both in the
culture(s) in general and in the church(es) in particular (including the whole complex question of early
Christian worship). Thus the two crucial contextual questions, what was going on and why, are especially
difficult to reconstruct.”
Fee, Gordon D. (1991). The First Epistle to the Corinthians. Eerdmans. 492.
Readings of 1 Corinthians 11:2-16 could be categorized in four ways.
1. Head coverings/hierarchical
2. Head coverings/non-hierarchical
3. Hairstyle/hierarchical
4. Hairstyle/non-hierarchical

Points of Contention
1. Head coverings or hairstyles?
2. One narrative/theology or two?

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

66 of 81

3. A unified narrative/theology or a tensive narrative/theology?
4. Creation or culture?
5. Kephale as ruler or source?
6. Authority as imposed upon or conferred upon women?
7. Does this apply to all men and all women or only to married men and married women?

Four Main Interpretive Strategies
1. A subordinationist reading: Paul is a subordinationist in relation to men and women and believes that
women need a sign of authorization on their heads to pray and prophesy in public.
2. A tensive reading: Paul believes in some kind of subordination of women to men and also in their
equality as reflected in the two sections of 1 Corinthians 11:2-10 and 1 Corinthians 11:11-16.
3. A rhetorical reading: Paul is engaging with the Corinthian men who are putting women in head
coverings on the basis of a misunderstanding over headship, and Paul is rebuking them.
4. A cultural reading: Paul believes that women and men should dress or arrange their hair in certain ways
to protect one another from shame in the prevailing culture.
A fifth option is to admit we don’t understand the passage and to leave it as obscure, but evangelicals
generally do not relate to Scripture in this way.

Reflection Question
Do your best to summarize Lucy’s reading/interpretation of 1 Corinthians 11:2-16.

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

67 of 81

