Session 22: The Resurrected Body

Key Takeaways
The life-giving Spirit transforms human life, spiritual and physical, to make it fit for the future world
when Heaven and Earth fully unite.
Paul links Jesus' resurrection to the future Day of the Lord, when the final enemy of humanity, death, will
be destroyed.

The Resurrected Body
Paul addresses the Corinthians’ attitude toward the resurrection.
1 Corinthians 15:32 NIV
If the dead are not raised, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.”
In response, Paul quotes Isaiah 22:13.
1 Corinthians 15:33-34 NIV
33

Do not be misled: “Bad company corrupts good character.”

34

Come back to your senses as you ought,

and stop sinning; for there are some who are ignorant of God—I say this to your shame.

Continuing the Theme of Shame
Here it is: ἐντροπή (Greek: entrope). This also occurs in 1 Corinthians 4:14 and 1 Corinthians 6:5: “I am not
saying this to shame you,” and “I say this to shame you” respectively.
This word is different from “disgrace” or “baseness,” which is αἰσχρός (Greek: aiscros). (Eph. 5:12, shameful to
speak of the things done in secret; Titus 1:11, false teachers teaching things for the sake of shameful/base
gain.) With αἰσχρός, there’s a sense of moral disgrace here.

ἀτιμία (Greek: atimia) is a state of dishonor, disrespect (e.g., long hair for a man 1 Cor. 11:14), and καταισχύνω
(Greek: kataischuno) means dishonor, disgrace, put to shame (1 Cor. 1:27, 11:4-5, 22).

The Seed Metaphor and Resurrection
1 Corinthians 15:35-41 NIV

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

77 of 81

35

But someone will ask, “How are the dead raised? With what kind of body will they come?”

What you sow does not come to life unless it dies.

37

and to each kind of seed he gives its own body.

How foolish!

When you sow, you do not plant the body that will be,

but just a seed, perhaps of wheat or of something else.
39

36

38

But God gives it a body as he has determined,

Not all flesh is the same: People have one kind of flesh,

animals have another, birds another and fish another.

40

There are also heavenly bodies and there are

earthly bodies; but the splendor of the heavenly bodies is one kind, and the splendor of the earthly bodies
is another.

41

The sun has one kind of splendor, the moon another and the stars another; and star differs

from star in splendor.
Verse 36 contains common rhetoric of “You fool!” Paul is blunt here.
He talks about bodies sown in one way and raised in another, but I want you to notice two things: first, the
seed metaphor and the continuity of identity, and second, the contrast of the body that is sown and the body
that is raised.
The body/seed is:
Sown in decay and raised in immortality
Sown in dishonor (atimia) and raised in glory
Sown in weakness and raised in power
Sown in a natural body and raised in a spiritual body
The last Adam is a life-giving spirit, but not only a spirit. The Spirit transforms what is flesh and blood to make
it fit for Heaven.
As far as Paul is aware, this happens in a twinkling of an eye! It is a small movement.

The Trumpet Will Sound!
A trumpet sound was associated with battle, with gathering (1 Thess. 4:16), and with manifestations of God (
Exod. 19:16; Zech. 9:14). It signals triumph and rouses the army. The theme of the Day of the Lord beginning
with a blast of a trumpet appears in Isaiah 27:13, Joel 2:1, and Zephaniah 1:16.
1 Corinthians 15:54-57 NIV
54

When the perishable has been clothed with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality, then the

saying that is written will come true: “Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
55

“Where, O death, is your victory?

Where, O death, is your sting?”
56

The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.

57

But thanks be to God! He gives us the victory

through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Paul Adapts the Prophets
The quote in 1 Corinthians 15:55 is from Isaiah 25:8, although it is different from the Septuagint and slightly
adapted to give a different meaning. “Where, O death, is your victory” is an adapted quote from Hosea 13:14.

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

78 of 81

1 Corinthians 15:54-57 NIV
54

When the perishable has been clothed with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality, then the

saying that is written will come true:
“Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
55

“Where, O death, is your victory?

Where, O death, is your sting?”
56

The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.

57

But thanks be to God! He gives us the victory

through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Hosea 13:14 NIV
I will deliver this people from the power of the grave;
I will redeem them from death.
Where, O death, are your plagues?
Where, O grave, is your destruction?
Isaiah 25:8 NIV
He will swallow up death forever.
The Sovereign LORD will wipe away the tears
from all faces;
he will remove his people’s disgrace
from all the earth.
The LORD has spoken.
“He will swallow death forever” becomes “death is swallowed in victory.”

Hosea 13:14b LXX
Where, O Death, is your judgment or penalty? Where, O Hades, is your sting?
Paul changes it to: “Where, O death, is your victory? Where, O death, is your sting?”

Death and victory are linked here in 1 Corinthians 15. Death is the last enemy; there is nothing left after it has
been completely destroyed, swallowed up, and devoured.
There is a debate about whether “we shall wear” is a future indicative or an aorist subjunctive. “We shall wear”
or “let us wear”—a promise or a precept (φορέσομεν from phoreo).
We have to “put on” (Greek: enduo) in order to inherit the Kingdom, so I think that tells us something.
In verse 58, Paul reiterates to the congregation that they are to stand firm—be steadfast and immovable.
This takes us right back to the beginning where Paul tells them that the Lord Jesus Christ will sustain them to
the end, blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. “In him is all our life” (1 Cor. 1:8).

Supplementary Notes: 1 Corinthians 16
Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

79 of 81

Paul wraps up the letter in chapter 16. There is no standard closure for Greek letters, so Paul just closes his
letter how he wishes.
The final chapter is split into sections.
1. Collection for Jerusalem (1-4)
2. Travel plans (5-12)
3. Concluding exhortations and greetings (13-24)
Paul’s desire for them to give to the churches in Jerusalem shows his concerns for “mutuality, reciprocity, and
solidarity” (Thiselton, 2006).
Here we see Paul’s emphasis on practical concerns, exhorting them to take responsibility for others and to
make sacrifices. We see the importance of giving and the theme of abundance (see also 2 Cor.).
The previous chapter ends (1 Cor. 15:58) with Paul calling the Corinthians to abound in the work of the Lord
(Greek: perisseuó / περισσεύω). This chapter begins (1 Cor. 16:1-4) talking about the abundance of God’s
provision. (Note that “Galatia” in verse 1 probably means all the churches planted in the province.)

On the Collection
Paul begins the chapter with the familiar phrase peri de (now concerning), signaling he’s dealing with
something they have raised.
We see the story of this collection playing out throughout Paul’s letters. Sharing with the Jewish church is a
theme in Romans 15:27, for example. The collection is finally delivered in 2 Corinthians 2:1.
This is not a tithe as such. Each is to give as they are able.

Conclusion
Paul mentions travel plans, but there is more to it than that. There are a number of people mentioned in this
final chapter whom Paul is asking the Corinthian church to honor and not to treat with contempt. It seems
that the Apollos visit was their request.

Reflection Question
How is the resurrection connected to creation?

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

80 of 81

Session 23: Reflecting on 1 Corinthians

Key Takeaways
Considering interpretive perspectives from different traditions than our own can help us see the text in
new ways.
1 Corinthians introduces us to Paul the person and gives us a glimpse into Paul’s heart for the people he
ministered to.
Wrestling with the text on its own terms can illuminate ways that its message applies to our lives today.

This session has no notes

Reflection Question
What is one takeaway or reflection you have from taking this class? How do you see the message of 1
Corinthians as relevant in your context?

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

81 of 81

