Session 3: Christ and the Spirit

Key Takeaways
For Paul, apostleship includes his calling to the Gentiles (all non-Jews) with the message of Christ
crucified.
Apostleship includes suffering.
Paul refers to the Gospel as the “mystery of God.”
The Gospel of Jesus is a revelation that comes only from the Spirit and not from the world, and the
Spirit within is not a spirit from the world but God himself.
The Spirit is associated with wisdom and power, as is Jesus Christ.
The Greek words psychikos (ψυχικὸς) and pneumatikos (πνευματικῶς) are two terms Paul uses to contrast
attitude and behavior. A psychikos is something unspiritual or natural—the natural person—and
pneumatikos is literally “spiritually”—that which can only be spiritually discerned.

Summary Verses
Within the first two chapters, Paul lays out a summary of the entire letter.
1 Corinthians 1:1 NIV
Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God ...
1 Corinthians 1:23a NIV
We preach Christ crucified ...
1 Corinthians 1:24b NIV
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
1 Corinthians 2:7 NIV
No, we declare God’s wisdom, a mystery that has been hidden and that God destined for our glory before
time began.
1 Corinthians 2:12 NIV
What we have received is not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, so that we may
understand what God has freely given us.

Paul the Apostle

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

24 of 81

What does apostleship mean to Paul?
1. A statement of authority
2. A servant/slave of Jesus Christ
3. Not based on natural gifting but chosen and called by God according to his will
4. A steward of the mystery of God
5. Sacrifice and suffering
In 1 Corinthians 4:1, he talks about himself, the other apostles, and Apollos as servants (not slaves here) and as
“stewards” of the mystery of God (Greek: oikonomos/οἰκονόμος—the manager of a household).
More specifically, for Paul this meant being called to the Gentiles and the non-Jews with this message. It also
meant to suffer.
Acts 9:15-16 NIV
15

But the Lord said to Ananias, “Go! This man is my chosen instrument to proclaim my name to the Gentiles

and their kings and to the people of Israel.

16

I will show him how much he must suffer for my name.”

Philippians 3:8 NIV
What is more, I consider everything a loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my
Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things. I consider them garbage, that I may gain Christ.

We Preach Christ Crucified
What is the significance of Paul saying here that “We preach Christ crucified”? Paul could have said Christ
risen and exalted or Christ the healer and Lord of the universe. Why is it a stumbling block to Jews and
foolishness to pagans?

“Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God” (1 Cor. 1:24b)
In what way does Paul see the crucified Messiah as wiser than human wisdom and stronger than human
strength?
1 Corinthians 2:7 NIV
No, we declare God’s wisdom, a mystery that has been hidden and that God destined for our glory before
time began.

The Mystery of God
Mystery here means something that is being revealed and that comes to us by revelation. This phrase also
occurs in 1 Corinthians 2:7, 4:1, 13:2, 14:2, 15:51 (also see Eph. 1:9; 3:3; 3:9; 5:32; 6:19 and Col. 1:26-27; 2:2; 4:3).
What does it mean for God’s wisdom through the cross of Christ to have been hidden “before time began”?
How is this linked to God’s destiny for human beings as “our glory”?
These things are revealed to us by the Spirit.

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

25 of 81

Glory and the Work of the Spirit
1 Corinthians 2:10b-12 NIV
10

The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.

11

For who knows a person’s thoughts except

their own spirit within them? In the same way no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God.
12

What we have received is not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, so that we may

understand what God has freely given us.
Pay attention to how Paul frames the role of the Spirit in this passage.
Revelation only comes by the Spirit and not from the world, and the Spirit within is not a spirit from the
world but is God himself
Not the spirit of the world (Greek: τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ κόσμου)
The Spirit who is from God, and the Spirit of God (Greek: τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ)
The Spirit is associated both with wisdom and with power, as is Jesus Christ
Received freely (also see 1 Cor. 4:7)
Paul cites Isaiah 64:4 in verse 9 and Isaiah 40:13 in verse 16
In 1 Corinthians 2:14, ψυχικὸς (Greek: psychikos) and πνευματικῶς (Greek: pneumatikos) are two terms by which
Paul contrasts attitudes and behavior.
Psychikos is “unspiritual” or “natural” (the natural person)
Pneumatikos is literally “spiritually” (spiritually discerned)
This takes us back to 1 Corinthians 1:26-31 where Paul sets up a contrast between the foolish and the wise of
the world.

Reflection Question
In the first chapter of 1 Corinthians, Paul refers to himself as an apostle. According to Paul, what does it mean
to be an apostle?

Class Notes: 1 Corinthians

26 of 81

