Session 24: The Symmetry of the Ship Scene

Key Takeaways
Chiasms encourage us to compare and contrast parallel sections of the text.
Jonah’s actions and words are often in contrast, and this is intentional. The author wants us to draw our
own conclusions and continue questioning Jonah’s motives.

Jonah, the Storm, and the Sailors: Translation and Literary Design
of Jonah 1:4-16

4 Now, Yahweh had hurled a great wind to the sea

and there was a great storm on the sea,
and the ship considered breaking apart.
A

5 And the sailors feared and each cried to his god,

and they hurled the cargo which was in the ship to the sea to make it lighter from upon them.
Now, Jonah went down into the far reaches of the ship,
and he laid down and fell asleep .

6 And the chief of the sailors approached him and said,

“What is it with you, sleeping ?
Get up, call to your god .
Perhaps a god will be concerned about us so that we will not perish .”

B

7 And each man said to his companion, “Come, let us cast lots,

so that we can know on whose account this evil is to us .”
So they cast lots and the lot fell on Jonah.

8 And they said to him, “Please tell us, on whose account is this evil to us ?

What is your work? And where do you come from?
C

What is your country? From what people are you?”
9 And he said to them , “I am a Hebrew,

and I fear Yahweh God of heaven
who made the sea and the dry land.”

10 And the men feared a great fear and they said to him, “What is this you have done?!”

Class Notes: Jonah

63 of 161

D

For the men knew that he was fleeing from before the face of Yahweh because he had
told them.

11 And they said to him , “What should we do to you that the sea may become calm for us?”

for the sea was going and storming.
C'

12 And he said to them , “Pick me up and hurl me to the sea .

Then the sea will become calm for you,
for I know that on account of me this great storm is to you. ”

13 And the men dug in to return to land

but they could not, for the sea was going and storming against them.
B'

14 And they called to Yahweh and said,

“Please Yahweh, do not let us perish on account of this man’s life
and don’t set innocent blood against us;
for you, O Lord, have done as you have pleased.”

15 And they picked up Jonah, and they hurled him to the sea ,

A'

and the sea stopped its raging.
16 Then the men feared the Lord a great fear ,

and they offered sacrifices to Yahweh and they vowed vows .

Jonah 1:4-16. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Reflection Question
So far in chapter 1, what evidence of Jonah’s motives being positive do you see? What evidence of Jonah’s
motives being negative do you see? Why do you think the author decides not to tell us what Jonah’s motives
are?

Class Notes: Jonah

64 of 161

