Session 16: How to Read an Ancient Text

Key Takeaways
We can use three strategies to understand the literary design of a work: Identifying the contextual
anchors (what the author assumes we know), identifying the literary units, and identifying repeated
words.
A “lead-word” is a significant repeated word in a text that helps us understand the meaning of the text.

Lessons in Literature
Literature is a form of literary communication through which an author conveys a “what” (the message)
through a carefully and intentionally crafted “how” (an artistically formed/shaped literary work).
The poetics of biblical literature are the “how” of Israelite literature.
The unique set of literary techniques, conventions, and strategies employed by the biblical authors (narrative,
poetry, and discourse) have a particular stylistic profile that is both similar to and different from other ancient
Near Eastern literature.

Recommended Resources
Robert Alter, The Art of Biblical Narrative
Adele Berlin, Poetics and Interpretation of Biblical Narrative
Shimon Bar-Efrat, Narrative Art in the Bible
Meir Sternberg, The Poetics of Biblical Narrative

The Epic Literary Genre
This genre can be defined as a larger collection of smaller narratives interwoven with poems and genealogies
and arranged into movements that exhibit a high degree of repetition and patterning.

Identifying Contextual Anchors
What does the author assume we know before we start reading this work? The opening words of biblical
literary works usually give some indicator of the context within which to understand the text.
For example, Jonah 1:1-2 invites the reader into a set of hyperlinks related to the backstory of Jonah and of
Nineveh.

Class Notes: Jonah

33 of 161

Literary Analysis
Study the literary features of a book in order to determine the boundaries of literary units (see David A.
Dorsey, The Literary Structure of the Old Testament: A Commentary on Genesis-Malachi, chapter 2).

Defining Literary Units
Read carefully and identify introductions, conclusions, and changes of setting, character, or time to find the
words that give clues to the narrative’s design on the micro-level.

Identifying Repeated Words
Read, re-read, use multiple translations (especially more literal ones) or an interlinear or a concordance, and
then re-read some more!
“A ‘lead-word’ is a word that repeats significantly in a text or group of texts, and by following these
repetitions, one is able to decipher or grasp a meaning of the text ... The repetition may not be of the same
exact word, but of the word-root ... which intensifies the dynamic action of the repetition ... if you imagine
the entire text stretched out before you, you can sense waves moving back and forth between key words,
matching the rhythm of the text ... it is one of the most powerful means of conveying meaning.”
Buber, Martin (2012). Schriften zur Bibelübersetzung. Gütersloher Verlagshaus. 1131.
An example of repeated words in Jonah is the use of “fear” and “hurl” in chapter 1 and the use of “call out” in
chapters 1-3.
“One of the most imposing barriers that stands between modern readers and the imaginative subtlety of
the biblical authors is the prominence of repetition. We are accustomed to stories in which repetition is far
less obvious, and so this is probably the feature of biblical narrative that looks most ‘primitive’ to the
modern eye ... In order to appreciate the artfulness of this kind of repetition, a modern reader has to
cultivate a new, even opposite, set of expectations than what they bring to literary works. Modern stories
usually attempt to mimic reality by giving us large amounts of information that is not crucial to the plot, so
that one is expected to detect the repetition of key themes and words among lots of other background
noise. Biblical narrative is the opposite. Here we are confronted with an extremely spare narrative with a
high degree of repetition and similarity, and what we are expected to notice is the small but revealing
differences among the sea of similarities. This is how new meanings emerge in pattern of expectations
created by explicit repetition.”
Alter, Robert (2011). The Art Of Biblical Narrative. Basic Books. 96-97.

Wordplay and Paronomasia
“Biblical authors often employ wordplays upon a name or a play made with sounds, but they also have
significant links between stories offered by names and puns ... there is a wide scope of possibilities: sound
effects, alliteration, word play, riddles, concealed meanings, key-word motifs. The biblical writers utilize
these potentialities within literary units in different ways ... The biblical authors are creative and very

Class Notes: Jonah

34 of 161

imaginative with this technique, pushing their word and sound associations far beyond the norms of
spoken language. Here ‘poetic license’ is indeed the name of the game.”
Garsiel, Moshe (1991). Biblical Names: A Literary Study of Midrashic Derivations and Puns. Bar-Ilan University
Press. 19-20.
An example of this type of wordplay in Jonah is the use of “go down/sleep/make vows” in chapter 1.

Techniques of Biblical Composition: Juxtaposition
Placing two narratives side by side so that their proximity encourages the reader to compare and contrast
their content (see Zakovitch, Through the Looking Glass: Reflection/Inversion Stories in Genesis) is called
juxtaposition.
An example of juxtaposition from Jonah can be seen in how the phrases “call out” (sailors vs. Jonah in
chapters 1-3) and “go down” (sailors’ vows in chapter 1 vs. Jonah’s vows in chapter 2) are used in the story.

Genesis 2-4 as Mutually Interpreting Temptation Narratives
Narratives

Genesis 2-3: Adam and Eve

Genesis 4: Cain and Abel

Human given a

2:16-17: “From any tree of the garden

4:5-7: But Yahweh did not regard Cain’s

significant choice

you may eat, but from the tree of

offering, and Cain was very angry …

for an unstated

knowing good and evil you should not

Yahweh said, “Why are you angry, and

reason

eat, because the day you eat from it you

why has your face fallen? Isn’t it the

will surely die.”

case that if you do good, you will be
lifted up?”

Human tempted

3:1: Now the snake was more crafty

4:7: “But if you don’t do good, sin is

by an animal

than any creature of the field … And he

crouching at the door, and it’s desire is

said to the woman, “Did God really say

for you.”

not to eat from any tree in the garden?”

Human gives into

3:6: When the woman saw that the tree

4:5: And Cain was very angry

temptation with

was good for food, and desirable to the

4:8: And Cain spoke to Abel his brother,

destructive

eyes, and desirable for gaining wisdom,

and while they were in the field Cain

consequences

she took ...

rose up against Abel his brother and
murdered him”

God shows up to

3:9: And God called out to the human

4:9: And God said to Cain, “Where is

ask a question

and said, “Where are you )‫”?(איכה‬

your )‫ (אי‬brother Abel?”

Genesis 2-4 Temptation Narratives. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Class Notes: Jonah

35 of 161

Narratives

Genesis 2-3: Adam and Eve

Genesis 4: Cain and Abel

3:12: And God said to the woman,

4:10: And God said, “What have you

"What have you done )‫”?(מה עשית‬

done )‫”?(מה עשית‬

The human

3:12: The human said, “The woman who

4:9: “I don’t know! Am I my brother’s

dodges the

you set with me, she gave to me and I

keeper?”

question

ate.”

The perpetrator is

3:14: God said to the serpent, “Because

4:11: “And now you are cursed from the

cursed

you have done this, you are cursed

ground …”

from every beast and from every
creature of the field”
3:17 “Cursed is the ground because of
you”

Working the

3:17b: “in pain you will eat from the

4:12: “For you will work the ground,

ground will now

ground”

and it will no longer give its strength to

be more difficult

3:23 And God sent him from the garden

you.”

of Eden to work the ground.

The human is

3:24: And [God] banished the human

4:14: “Behold, you have banished me

banished from

and he camped east of the garden of

from the face of the ground and from

the divine

Eden …

your presence.”

presence

4:16: And Cain settled in the land of
Nod, east of Eden.

Genesis 2-4 Temptation Narratives. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah (2019).

In his book, The Art of Biblical Narrative, Robert Alter quotes a famous Russian film director in his section on
biblical poetry and juxtaposition.
“It remains true to this day, that the juxtaposition of two separate shots by splicing them together
resembles not so much a simple sum of one shot plus one shot. Rather, it resembles a new creation. The
result is qualitatively distinguishable from each of the elements viewed separately ... This is the effect of the
montage: each piece exists no longer as something unrelated, but as a given particular representation of a
larger common theme that now penetrates all of the shot-pieces. This juxtaposition of these partial details
calls to life and forces into light any general qualities that each piece expresses that might bind them
together into a single whole, a single image that the spectator experiences.”
Alter, Robert (2011). The Art Of Biblical Narrative. Basic Books. 24.

Class Notes: Jonah

36 of 161

Reflection Question
What kinds of things should we pay attention to in order to understand a text’s literary design? Which of these
would be most helpful for you or others in your context?

Class Notes: Jonah

37 of 161

