Session 26: The Upside-Down Character of Jonah

Key Takeaways
In the book of Jonah, everything is upside-down, and every character reverses their stereotypical
behavior, including the pagans and Jonah. The only person who is true to form is God.
The phrase “the uttermost parts of the ship” is a clever wordplay on a well-known phrase for the cosmic
mountain of God that is associated with Eden, “the uttermost reaches of the north” (Ps. 48).

Jonah’s Flight to a Pseudo-Eden
Jonah’s flight (Jon. 1:3) introduces a major theme in chapter 1 that comically inverts a standard biblical motif:
humans exiled from Eden because of their attempt to recreate their own version of Eden in high places or
gardens and with wealth or wisdom.
Jonah, on the other hand, goes down instead of up, and he runs toward death instead of life.

Jonah’s “Descent” Into Death
Jonah 1:3a NASB*
Jonah went down (yarad) to Joppa (yapho).
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

”Went down“ = yarad = ‫וירד‬

Jonah 1:3b NASB*
Jonah went down (yarad) into the ship.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

”Went down“ = yarad = ‫וירד‬

Jonah 1:5 NASB*
Jonah went down (yarad) into the uttermost parts of the ship (yarketey-hasephinah), and he lay down and
went into a deep sleep (vayeradam).
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

”Far reaches” = yarketey = ‫ירכתי‬
”Deep sleep” = yeradam = ‫וירדם‬

Class Notes: Jonah

66 of 161

The triple repetition of “went down” (‫ )ירד‬is echoed by Jonah’s “deep sleep” (‫ )וירדם‬and the location he seeks
upon the ship (‫)ירכתי‬. All three of these terms connect to Jonah’s inverted Eden.
“Deep sleep” is associated with a lifeless slumber caused by Yahweh when he does something for the sleeper
that they could not do for themselves. This prompts one to wonder: Is Jonah’s deep sleep a kind of judgment?
Is Yahweh’s providence taking Jonah “all the way to the bottom”?

Adam’s “Deep Sleep” in Eden
Genesis 2:21 NASB
So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and he slept. Then he took one of his sides and
closed up the flesh at that place.

Abraham’s “Deep Sleep” When Given the Eden Blessing
Genesis 15:12 NASB
Now when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and behold, terror and great darkness
fell upon him.
The phrase “the uttermost parts of the ship” is a clever wordplay on a well-known name for the cosmic
mountain of God that is associated with Eden, “the uttermost reaches of the north.”
Uttermost parts of the ship = yarketey hasephinah / ‫הספינה ירכתי‬
Uttermost reaches of the north = yarketey hatsaphon / ‫הצפון ירכתי‬
“Zaphon, a mountain to the north of Israel, represented a divine abode in the ancient period. Accordingly,
Zaphon in the Bible signifies either a heavenly divine location (“I will rise up into the heavens ... I will sit on
the mountain of divine assembly, in the upper reaches of Zaphon,” Isa. 14:13) or to the sacred mountain in
Jerusalem (“Mount Zion, the upper reaches of Zaphon,” Ps. 48:3). The divine mountain, for its part,
constitutes a secure, paradisiacal location, one that Ezekiel ... likens to “the garden of God” (Ezek. 28:13-14).
Based on the biblical and comparative evidence, scholars characterize the garden of Eden as an archetypal
sanctuary, a place where God dwells and where humans worship him.” Correspondingly, the Israelite
temple on Mount Zion is identified with the primeval hill, paradise, the cosmic mountain.”
Berger, Yitzhak (2016). Jonah in the Shadows of Eden. Indiana University Press. 3-4.
“The uttermost reaches of the north” is a biblical phrase with rich overtones of the cosmic mountain range in
the far north (Mount Hermon and beyond). This was the mythological realm of the Canaanite deities (see
Clifford, 2010). It was an exotic, snowy, high place of the divine realm, where Heaven and Earth overlapped.
The biblical authors adopted this phrase and image to describe the temple in Jerusalem, which was an image
of Eden, the true cosmic mountain (Ps. 46).
Psalm 48:1-2 NASB
1

Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised,

in the city of our God, his holy mountain.

Class Notes: Jonah

67 of 161

2

Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth,

is Mount Zion, the uttermost reaches of the north,
the city of the great King.
Psalm 46:4-5 NASB
4

There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God,

the holy dwelling places of the Most High.
5

God is in the midst of her, she will not be moved;

God will help her when morning dawns.
Isaiah depicts the spiritual power behind Babylon as a divine rebel who attempted to ascend God’s throne in
Eden, which is called “the uttermost reaches of the north.” Isaiah inverts the phrase to describe the “uttermost
parts of the grave.”
Isaiah 14:13-15 NASB*
13

“But you said in your heart,

’I will ascend to the heavens;
I will raise my throne above the stars of God,
And I will sit on the mount of assembly
In the uttermost parts of the north (yarketey tsaphon).
14

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds;

I will make myself like the Most High.’
15

Nevertheless you will be thrust down to Sheol,

To the uttermost parts of the pit (yarketey bor).”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

This phrase “uttermost parts of the pit” taps into a widespread motif of descent into the grave as an anti-Eden.
Ezekiel 32:18, 21-23 NASB*
18

Son of man, wail for the hordes of Egypt and bring it down, her and the daughters of the powerful

nations, to the underworld, with those who go down to the pit ...
21

The strong among the mighty ones shall speak of him and his helpers from the midst of Sheol, “They

have gone down, they lie still, the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.”
22

Assyria is there and all her company; her graves are round about her. All of them are slain, fallen down by

the sword,

23

whose graves are set in the uttermost parts of the pit and her company is round about her

grave.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The author is portraying the prophet as fleeing the call of Yahweh to the nations only to seek his own selfmade version of Eden by turning to the nations. In boarding a ship bound for Tarshish, Jonah is actually
beginning his descent into death, and the author cleverly calls Jonah’s bed “the uttermost parts of the ship”
(that is, north).

Class Notes: Jonah

68 of 161

This phrase also prepares us to expect a storm, which will humble and threaten to break apart the ships of
Tarshish.

God’s Judgment on the Ships of Tarshish
In Isaiah 2 and Ezekiel 26-27, God brings judgment on the nations for building false Edens with the wealth of
Tarshish.
Isaiah 2:12, 16 Instructor’s Translation
12

For Yahweh of armies has a day ...

16

against all the ships of Tarshish, and against all the desirable ships.

Isaiah 23:1 NASB
Wail, O ships of Tarshish,
for Tyre is destroyed without house or harbor;
Psalm 48:4-5,7 NASB*
4

The kings assemble themselves together ...

5

They saw and were stunned ...

7

With the east wind

you break the ships of Tarshish.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Just as in Jonah 1:4

Jonah 1 and 3 have been designed to echo the divine judgment on Tyre and the ships of Tarshish in Ezekiel 2627.

Ezekiel 26-27: The Sailors for
Tyre

Jonah 1: The Sailors to Tarshish

Jonah 3: The Ninevites

26:16: And the princes of the

The king rises from his throne

sea will go down from upon

)‫(מכסאו‬, removes his robe
)‫(אדרתו ויעבר‬, and sits in the
dust )‫(וישב על האפר‬.

their thrones )‫ (כסאותם מעל‬and
they will remove their robes

)‫ (והסירו מעיליהם‬and their
garments of embroidery they
will strip off; with trembling they
will clothe themselves; they will
sit upon the ground

)‫ (ישבו הארץ על‬and shudder
The Sailors in Ezekiel Going to Tyre and in Jonah Going to Tarshish. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Class Notes: Jonah

69 of 161

Ezekiel 26-27: The Sailors for
Tyre

Jonah 1: The Sailors to Tarshish

Jonah 3: The Ninevites

nonstop, and they will be
appalled at you.

27:3-4: Tyre, perfect in beauty

1:1-3: Jonah flees to Joppa )‫(יפו‬

)‫ (יפי‬... they perfected your
beauty.
27:11: They perfected your
beauty )‫(יפיך‬.
28:7: Foreigners will … defile
your beauty )‫(יפעתך‬, while the
king of Tyre was perfect in
beauty (28:12 ‫(יפי‬, which gave
rise to arrogance in your beauty
(28:17 ‫(יפיך‬.

27:8b: Your wise ones, O Tyre,

1:5-6: The chief of sailors

were among you, they were

)‫ (החבל רב‬and sailors )‫(מלחים‬,

your sailors.

these words appear only in

27:9b: All the ships of the sea

Ezekiel 27 and Jonah 1.

and their sailors

)‫ (אניות ומלחיהם הים‬were among
you.

27:12: Tarshish was your trader

1:3: Jonah paid the fare )‫(שכר‬.

)‫ (סחרתך‬due to the greatness of
your wealth (See ‫סחר‬, “trade” in
27:15, 16, 18, 21, 36).

27:23: Haran, Caneh, and Eden,

Jonah found a ship )‫ (אניה‬going

traders of Sheba, Assyria,

to Tarshish )‫(תרשיש‬.

Kilmad, were your traders.
27:25: Ships of Tarshish were

2:3: You cast me into the heart
of the seas )‫(ימים בלבב‬.

carriers of your merchandise,
and they were filled and very
heavy in the heart of the seas.

The Sailors in Ezekiel Going to Tyre and in Jonah Going to Tarshish. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Class Notes: Jonah

70 of 161

Ezekiel 26-27: The Sailors for

Jonah 1: The Sailors to Tarshish

Jonah 3: The Ninevites

27:26: An east wind broke you in

1:4: God hurled a great wind

4:8: And God appointed an east

the heart of the seas

)‫ (רוח גדולה‬upon the sea … so

wind )‫(הקדים רוח‬, a burning one.

)‫(רוח הקדים שברך בלב ימים‬.

that the ship considered

Tyre

breaking up

)‫(והאניה חשבה להשבר‬.
27:27: Your wealth, your wares,

1:5: And the sailors … hurled the

your merchandise,

cargo in the ship into the sea to

your sailors and your pilots,

lighten from upon them.

your repairers of seams, your
dealers in merchandise
and all your men of war who are
in you,
with all your company that is in
your midst,
will fall into the heart of the seas
on the day of your downfall.

27:28-30: At the sound of the

1:5: And the sailors cried out

3:6: The king of Nineveh sat

cry of your sailors )‫(זעקת חבליך‬

)‫ (ויזעקו‬each to his god.

upon the ashes )‫ (האפר‬and he

the pasture lands will shake.

cried )‫ (ויעזק‬out.

All who handle the oar, the
sailors and all the
pilots of the sea will come down
from their ships.
They will stand on the land, and
they will make their voice heard
over you, and will cry )‫(ויזעקו‬
bitterly.
They will cast dust on their
heads.
They will wallow in ashes

)‫(באפר‬.
27:31: Also they will make

3:7-8: Let human and animal …

themselves bald for you and

clothe themselves with

gird themselves with sackcloth

sackcloth )‫(שקים‬.

)‫(שקים‬. And they will weep for
you in bitterness of soul with
bitter mourning.

The Sailors in Ezekiel Going to Tyre and in Jonah Going to Tarshish. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Class Notes: Jonah

71 of 161

These hyperlinks bring perspective to Jonah’s flight and the portrayal of the sailors and Ninevites.

Tyre and Its Sailors
In Ezekiel 26-27, Tyre was using the sailors and ships of Tarshish (among other places) to bring Eden-like
wealth, security, and abundance to their “rock” (‫ = ”צר‬Tyre”) in the “heart of the seas” (Ezek. 27:4). But God will
reverse all of their wealth, sending storms to break their ships so that all the sailors cry out in grief, sit in the
dust, and mourn over Tyre’s lost wealth.

Jonah and the Sailors
Jonah is fleeing to his own pseudo-Eden by heading to Tarshish (on Tyre’s fleet) and paying its fare, but God
sends a storm to humble his wayward prophet so that the sailors cry out in fear.

The Sailors and the Ninevites
Because the design of Jonah sets the response of the sailors in parallel with the response of the Ninevites, and
both of these groups are contrasted with Jonah, it makes perfect sense that the grief and crying out of Tyre’s
sailors would be applied to the sailors of Tarshish and tthe Ninevites. Both imitate the crying and grief of the
sailors in Ezekiel 26-27.
“In this sequence of prophecies [Ezekiel 26-28], the prophet compares the glamorous Tyre, a kingdom
supplied and signified by ships of Tarshish, to the divine mountain and the garden of Eden. If, accordingly,
Jonah occupies a Tarshish-bound vessel that stands in parallel to those ships, this yields ... evidence that
our protagonist seeks an Eden-like realm of the kind that Ezekiel describes.”
Berger, Yitzhak (2016). Jonah in the Shadows of Eden. Indiana University Press. 5.
“As for Jonah having provided the sakar of the vessel (‘its fare’) ... consider the familiar motif of treasureladen ships of Tarshish ... Every biblical reference to the ships of Tarshish signal this luxuriant motif, none
more emphatically than Ezekiel 27. [With these associations] the clause in Jonah ‘he provided its fare,’ much
like the place name ‘Joppa’ (‫ יפי‬// ‫‘ יפו‬beauty’), gives rise to a highly consequential secondary meaning: In
stocking/providing the vessel’s fare, a fleeing Jonah, pursuing the idyllic realm that ships of Tarshish supply
and signify, hastily provided the ship with the fortune it is destined to carry. The text suggests that the
prophet, seeking to escape toward that paradisiacal domain of Tarshish, started out in pursuit of that
‘beautiful’ (‫ )יפו‬location.”
Berger, Yitzhak (2016). Jonah in the Shadows of Eden. Indiana University Press. 6-7.

Jonah's Prophetic Failure vs. the Sailors' Spiritual Intuition
Jonah is portrayed as selfish and slow to understand the reality of his situation, while the sailors are depicted
as spiritually aware and more in tune with Jonah’s God than Jonah is.
Jonah’s hypocritical confession in 1:9 shows that he is totally unaware of the contradiction between his
actions and his words.

Class Notes: Jonah

72 of 161

Jonah 1:9 NASB*
I fear Yahweh, the God of the heavens, who made the sea and the dry land.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 95:3, 5 NIV*
3

Yahweh is a great God ...

5

The sea is his, for he made it,

and the dry land, his hands formed it.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The irony is that Jonah’s confession of his “beliefs” is likely based on the formulation of Psalm 95, but this
psalm is a call for Israel not to rebel against their God precisely because he is the creator and ruler of all—the
very thing Jonah is doing as he quotes these words.

Interpretive Ambiguity
Is Jonah’s confession in 1:9 an indirect admission of guilt?
“This is not an empty declaration that Jonah worships the Lord (‘fear’ or ‘awe’ in the conventional meaning
of fealty and obedience) ... It is rather implicit acknowledgment of his personal responsibility for their
predicament because he falls under the direct jurisdiction of the God of sky and sea, therefore the punitive
action—the storm—is clearly directed against him.”
Simon, Uriel (1999). JPS Bible Commentary: Jonah. Jewish Publication Society. 12.
“The implication of the confession of faith is that the source of the storm is none other than Yahweh who
made the sea. The wonder is that Jonah can recite such a creed and yet show disrespect to the commands
of the God whose sovereignty it celebrates.”
Allen, Leslie C. (1976). The Books of Joel, Obadiah, Jonah, and Micah. Eerdmans. 210.
In contrast, the sailors’ prayer to God in 1:14 quotes from the psalms and has the opposite effect.
Jonah 1:14 Instructor’s Translation
Please Yahweh, don’t let us perish on account of this man’s life ... for just as you have purposed, you have
done.
Psalm 115:2-3 NASB*
2

Why should the nations say,

“Where now is your God?”
3

Our God is in the heavens,

And everything which he purposes, he does.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 135:5-6 NIV*

Class Notes: Jonah

73 of 161

5

I know that Yahweh is great,

and our Lord is greater than all gods.
6

Everything which he purposes, Yahweh does

in the heavens, on the land,
in the seas and all the depths.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The irony is that Jonah confessed to believe in the “God of the heavens,” yet it is the sailors who actually
understand the implications of such a belief. They recognize the storm as God’s purpose and a result of his
power over the sea.
“In both psalms, the confession of faith contrasts Yahweh with other, impotent gods (135:5) and idols (
115:4-7) ... In this way—through the prayer in general and through its individual phrases—the narrator
depicts the heathen sailors as people who turn to Yahweh like model Israelites, at least where Jonah’s affairs
are concerned, and when they are in danger of shipwreck.”
Wolff, Hans Walter (1986). Obadiah and Jonah: A Commentary. Augsburg Fortress Pub. 120.

Reflection Question
Recall the page from the children’s magazine Highlights called “What’s Wrong?” where readers are challenged
to find everything that’s not quite right in the picture. What do you find helpful about this example? Is there a
different example or illustration that would help those in your context understand how the author of Jonah is
subverting or playing with reader expectations?

Class Notes: Jonah

74 of 161

