Session 18: Hyperlinks in the Hebrew Bible

Key Takeaways
Repeated words can signal a theme and link chapters that are in sequence to each other or in different
parts of the Hebrew Bible.
The portrait of Jonah in chapter 4 is hyperlinked to the portrait of Elijah in 1 Kings 19. The Elijah story
itself also hyperlinks to the golden calf story in Exodus.
The Hebrew Bible is meditation literature for a lifetime. Every word, every episode, and every scene is
intentional—you’ll never stop noticing threads and connections.

Literary Symmetry
This same kind of juxtaposition happens between literary units that are not side by side but connected by
literary symmetry and key word links.
An example of this from Jonah can be seen in the use of “arise, go call” in chapters 1 and 3, in the use of
“pray” in chapters 2 and 4, and in the use of “perish” in chapters 1 and 3.
“Prose narrative naturally expects linear reading, i.e., progressive reading from one unit to the next (from A
to B to C, etc.) as the story unfolds through the text. Symmetrically organized narrative offers additional
avenues for interpretive access as well ... because it invites multi-level comparison. We can examine why
units are placed next to one another (A and B), but also are invited to mentally juxtaposed symmetrically
paired units (A and A’). This pattern also invites comparison between entire matching sequences (ABC and
A’B’C’). Different symmetrical patterns can indicate reversal (ABCDC’B’A’), progression (ABC/A’B’C’), or even
intensification (ABC/A’B’C’D).”
Walsh, Jerome (2001). Style and Structure in Biblical Hebrew Narrative. Liturgical Press. 12.

Class Notes: Jonah

40 of 161

Class Notes: Jonah

41 of 161

Connections Between Chapters of Jonah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Literary Techniques for Analyzing Literary Design and Thematic
Development
Intertextual Hyperlinks and Dynamic Analogies
The biblical authors regularly invite comparison and analogies between different sections of the Hebrew
Scriptures. They do this in a manner similar to hyperlinks on a web page, where a key word or well-known
allusive phrase will signal to the reader that the other text is meant to be recalled and connected thematically
to the present text.

1 Kings 19: Elijah

Jonah 1-4

Elijah flees from Jezebel after defeating the

Jonah flees from God’s call to go to Nineveh

prophets of Baal on Mt. Carmel

Elijah walks one day into the wilderness (19:4a)

Jonah walks one day into Nineveh (3:4)
Jonah goes east of Nineveh (4:5)

Elijah “asked for his life, to die

“And now, Yahweh, please take my life )‫ (נפשי‬from

)‫( ”(וישאל את־נפשו למות‬19:4b)

me, for good is my death more than my life” (4:3)
“And he asked for his life, to die

)‫( ”(וישאל את־נפֹשו למות‬4:8)
“And he lay down and he slept )‫(וישכב ויישן‬, and

“And [Jonah] lay down and he slept )‫… (וישכב וירדם‬

look, an angel touching him, and he said, ‘Arise

And the captain said … ‘Arise )‫ (קום‬call on your

)‫(קום‬, eat!’” (19:5)

God!’” (1:5-6)

Elijah journeys 40 days to Mt. Horeb (Mount Sinai)

Jonah announces 40 days until Nineveh’s

(19:8)

destruction (3:4)

God asks Elijah two times why he has come to Mt.

God asks two times if it is good that Jonah is angry

Horeb (19:9, 13)

at his mercy (4:4, 9)

Elijah gives the same exaggerated, self-pitying

Jonah gives the same pathetic and selfish answer

answer two times (19:10, 14)

two times (4:2, 9)

Narrative Analogy Between Elijah and Jonah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah
(2019).

Class Notes: Jonah

42 of 161

1 Kings 19: Elijah

Jonah 1-4

God communicates with Elijah through symbolic

God communicates with Jonah through symbolic

natural phenomena (wind, earthquake, lightning)

natural phenomena (plant, worm, wind) (4:6-8)

(19:11-12)

God counters Elijah’s self-pity: You are not the only

God counters Jonah’s self-pity: You had pity on this

faithful Israelite, I have 7,000 others (19:18)

plant, shouldn’t I have pity on a great city? (4:10-11)

Narrative Analogy Between Elijah and Jonah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah
(2019).

Exodus 14:31

The Sailors and Ninevites

After the Israelites are rescued from the sea

Jonah is rescued from the sea

And the Israelites saw the great hand which

1:16: And the sailors feared Yahweh

Yahweh acted against Egypt and the people feared

)‫ את־יהוה‬... ‫ (וייראו‬a great fear ...

Yahweh )‫ (וייראו העם את־יהוה‬and they believed in
Yahweh )‫ (ויאמינו ביהוה‬and in Moses his servant.

3:5: And the men of Nineveh believed in God

)‫(ויאמינו באלהים‬.
Dynamic Analogy in Jonah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah (2019).

Criteria for identifying intertextual hyperlinks (Leonard, 2008)
1. Clusters of shared words or phrases
2. Shared language that consists of distinct vocabulary
3. Shared language within thematically similar contexts
4. Shared language between units that are united by other literary strategies (similar plot, themes,
settings)

Inversion/Reflection Stories
This is “a strategy used by biblical narrators to aid the reader in evaluating characters ... It’s one of the many
instances of intertextuality so common in biblical literature. The narrators use many overt allusions to other
narratives known to them and to their audience ... in order to shape a character as the antithesis of a
character in another narrative. The new creation awakens in the reader undeniable associations to the
source-story; the relationship between the new narrative and its source is like that between an image and
its mirrored reflection: the reflection inverts the storyline of the original narrative ... The discerning reader
will consider the implicit relation between the two narratives—the original and its reflection—and observe
how the new character behaves contrary to the character upon which he or she is modeled. The reader is
being asked to evaluate the new hero in light of the model, both with regard to action and to lack of action.

Class Notes: Jonah

43 of 161

In addition, the comparison created between the two stories sheds new light on the source story and its
protagonist. I call these ‘inverted’ stories reflection stories.”
Zakovitch, Yair (1993). Through the Looking Glass: Reflections/Inversions of Genesis Stories in the Bible. Brill.

Narrative Analogy and Design Patterns
Robert Alter gives the example of cowboy western films. What if 1,200 years from now, post-apocalyptic
archaeologists discover an old Hollywood film vault with dozens of old western films? They’d watch and
analyze them and notice patterns.
“In eleven films, the sheriff hero has the same anomalous neurological trait of hyperreflexivity—no matter
what the situation in which his adversaries confront him, he is always able to pull his gun out its holster and
fire before they can, even if they’re already poised with their own weapons ... But, in the twelfth film, the
sheriff has an injured arm and instead of a pistol he uses a rifle that he carries, slung over his back ...
Contemporary viewers of westerns recognize the convention without even having to name it as such. Much
of our pleasure in watching westerns derives from our awareness that the hero, however sinister the
dangers looming ahead, leads a charmed life that he will always in the end prove himself more successful
than his enemies ... For us, the repetitive pattern across all these cinematic works is not an enigma to be
explained, but a necessary condition for telling a story within expected conventions of the film medium.
With our easy knowledge of the patterns, we naturally see the point of the twelfth sheriff, and we can spot
the pattern of the quick-draw sheriff by its absence.”
Alter, Robert (2011). The Art Of Biblical Narrative. Basic Books.

Symphonic Development of Themes Through Narrative Analogy
“A musical approach to Scripture encompasses a number of aspects, each of which can help us see
Scripture in a fresh light ... One aspect of the music metaphor is the relationship between melody and
harmony. The Bible has a clear storyline, a melody, but it also has a range of individual and corporate
stories that run together, sometimes taking center stage, sometimes fading into the background, providing
harmony and counterpoint, treble and bass, height and depth, in such a way that no single writer (or
musician) could possibly represent it all. Studying the Bible is about exploring the detail of the harmony —
Why is the oboe, or Obadiah, doing that, and how does it contribute to the whole piece?—without losing
sight of the melody ... Another (and more subtle) aspect is the interplay between rhythm and meter. Meter
is the underlying time structure of a piece—one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four—and although it may
vary within the piece, it provides a grounding in time, a sense of orientation, for the listener. Rhythm is the
structure of the sound you actually hear— boom, ba-cha, boom, boom, ba-cha— which may involve a
number of notes in one beat, or a number of beats without notes. The rhythm rides the meter like a surfer
rides a wave, playing, doing its own thing, but always mindful of and constrained by the steady movement
underneath. As the Bible commences with its overture, we hear a melody, and a regular rhythm begins. As
things develop, various harmonies and disharmonies arise ... leaving us listeners to wonder what the
Composer is doing. And a good Composer allows dissonance to create anticipation for the right time to
heal it. Then the melody returns, cutting through the cacophony and bringing a temporary sense of
resolution. To someone who has never heard the piece before, some moments can even sound like the
symphony is fully resolved and is about to finish (a new reader of the Bible could easily think the tension is
resolved, for instance, upon the entrance into the Promised Land or David’s coronation). Yet these

Class Notes: Jonah

44 of 161

temporary resolutions produce tensions of their own, which point forward to more complexities, and
beyond them, to further resolutions. Throughout the Bible, as time metronomically marches on, the
rhythms of Scripture continue to be accented, with particular days and festivals highlighting rest and
freedom, law and atonement. But every bar, every cadence, every pause, heightens the sense that the
piece is still incomplete. Eventually, after an uncomfortably long silence, the score builds to a massive
crescendo in Jesus the Messiah, as the various themes come together and resolve in a fashion that nobody
could have quite imagined, but yet seems completely natural ... Only at the finale, when the Christcrescendo is recapitulated and the instruments are joined by earthly and angelic choirs, do we ultimately
see the full scope of the Composer’s vision. As such, a musical reading of Scripture does more justice to
the way Scripture actually works. Scriptural typology is more like a piece of music: familiar themes like
temple, kingdom, exodus, judgment, and sacrifice keep recurring, but always slightly differently. The
judgment of Jerusalem is not just a ‘picture’ or ‘shadow’ of the last day; nor is it simply a dramatic ‘event’
that happens once and then is no more. It is somehow a part of the future judgment, a foretaste of it, and
yet at the same time historically distinct from it. The final resolution, when it comes, is both familiar and
new at the same time. It is, in that sense, musical.”
Roberts, Alastair J. and Wilson, Andrew (2018). Echoes of Exodus: Tracing Themes of Redemption Through
Scripture. Crossway.

A Series of Questions To Ask of Every Literary Unit
1. What is the literary design of the unit?
2. What are the key words and wordplay within each literary unit?
3. What are the relationships and links to the juxtaposed literary units?
4. What are the relationships and links to symmetrically-paired units?
5. What are the intertextual relationships and links within the unit?
6. What are the relationships and links to inner-book patterns?
7. What are the relationships and links to inner-TaNaK patterns?

Reflection Question
How is Jonah like Elijah or Moses? How is he not like them? How do you think these similarities or differences
affect our perspective on the character of Jonah?

Class Notes: Jonah

45 of 161

