Class Notes: Jonah
159 of 161
Session 45: Reflecting on the Ending of Jonah
Key Takeaways
The mercy of God is remarkable. It is given to our enemies and also to us when we struggle with the
fact that God loves our enemies.
The meaning of Jonah is clear, and we can all agree on it no matter our different views about the
historical reference of the events in the book.
The Sense of an Ending
“The narrative of Jonah’s story lacks closure, a sense of completion, and a sense that nothing necessary has
been omitted from the work. The book ends without a resolution to the major conflict of the narrative’s plot.
The reader experiences the greatest sense of closure at the end of the third chapter as Nineveh repents
and God forgives. Even the fourth chapter begins by providing closure regarding Jonah’s flight, but the
book’s final scene immediately reopens that closure just experienced by the reader. God’s question
concludes the book, leaving Jonah’s response in the minds of the reader. This lack of closure at the end of
the narrative is a literary device used to involve the reader in the ideological conflict that propels the real
plot of the book: Jonah’s sense of justice versus God’s boundless mercy. The final scene blurs the narrative
frame, so that the world of the text reaches out and envelops the world of the reader, forcing them to ask
whose perspective they will adopt.”
Crouch, Walter B. (1994). “To Question and End, To End and Question: Opening and Closure in the Book of
Jonah.” Sage Journals, vol. 19, 62. 112.
“[T]he final scene is so skillfully designed that when Jonah insists on Yahweh’s free pity, he cannot really
avoid simultaneously conceding to his God the forgiving mercy he has extended to the pagans. But the
narrator leaves the readers to draw this harmonizing conclusion themselves. Even the most morosely
obstinate of them can hardly do other than—in Jonah’s place—respond with gratitude to their God’s final
question.”
Wolff, Hans Walter (1986). Obadiah and Jonah: A Commentary. Augsburg Fortress. 88.
“The ‘surprise’ gap at the beginning of the story, with regard to Jonah’s motive for running away, is filled in
at the conclusion, when Jonah impeaches the Lord’s grace and compassion as the reason for his flight (4:2),
and even more so in the last verse of the book, in which the Lord justifies His decision to show mercy for
Nineveh. As Meir Sternberg argues, the impression conveyed by the start of the story is that God is wrathful
and punitive. As for Jonah and his flight, we mistakenly believe that the recalcitrant prophet ‘is too
tenderhearted to carry a message of doom to a great city. He obviously protests against a wrathful God not
with words, like Abraham or Moses or Samuel, but with his feet.’ But the last verses of the book show that
we had it backwards: Jonah does not flee because God is a wrathful God, but because He is a merciful God.

Class Notes: Jonah
160 of 161
The Lord’s reaction to the Ninevites’ penance—‘When God saw what they did, how they turned from their
evil way, God repented of the evil which He had said he would do to them; and He did not do it’ (3:10)—
clearly echoes ‘the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do to his people’ (Exod 32:14). Thus the
book of Jonah teaches us that the Lord’s mercy is not reserved exclusively for ‘His people’ but extends to all
of His creation, including its animals, who (unlike Jonah) are not only obedient agents of his will in this
story, but also, along with humans, objects of his mercy.”
Shemesh, Yael (2010). “’And Many Beasts’ (Jonah 4:11): The Function and Status of Animals in the Book of
Jonah.” Journal of Hebrew Scriptures, vol. 10. 22
You, Jonah,
how low
how deep
will you go
to secure
sleep?
You, Jonah,
how high
will you fare
hoping I
will ignore
you there?
You, Jonah,
how far
will you aim
your mariner
to protect your name
from my claim?
You! Jonah!
And Jonah stalked
to his shaded seat
and waited for God
to come around
to his way of thinking.
And God is still waiting
for a host of Jonahs
in their comfortable houses
to come around
to his way of loving.
Carlisle, Thomas John (1968). You! Jonah! Eerdmans.

Class Notes: Jonah
161 of 161
Reflection Question
As you ponder the end of Jonah, why do you think the book ends with a question?
