Session 23: Reflecting on Jonah’s Flight

Key Takeaways
Jonah is the most extreme example of a prophet who resists God’s call on their life.
God wants humans to experience Eden, but they keep forfeiting it through rebellion and creating their
own versions of it. Cain’s city, Babylon, and Jerusalem under Israel’s kings all represent false Edens.
Psalm 139 is a good companion text for Jonah because Jonah was clearly on the mind of the psalmist.
The authors of the Hebrew Bible are mostly anonymous because what matters to the text’s authority are
the people in whom the tradition is anchored such as Moses, the prophets, or Isaiah.

The Resistant Prophet
Jonah’s flight is extreme behavior for a resistant prophet, bringing to mind other resistant prophets in the
Hebrew Bible, like Moses, Elijah, and Jeremiah. This action by Jonah opens up large-scale comparisons and
contrasts with these three prophets.

Moses the Resistant Prophet
Exodus 3:10 NASB
Therefore, come now, and I will send you to Pharaoh, so that you may bring my people, the sons of Israel,
out of Egypt.
The commission

Exodus 3:11 NASB
Who am I?
First objection

Exodus 3:13 NASB
What is [your] name?
Second objection: Moses is asking, “Who are you?”

Exodus 4:1 NASB
What if they [don’t] believe me?

Class Notes: Jonah

60 of 161

Third objection

Exodus 4:10 NASB*
Please, my Lord, I’m not a man of words ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Fourth objection

Exodus 4:13 ESV*
Please, my Lord, send someone else!
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Fifth objection

Exodus 4:12 NASB
Now then go, and I, even I, will be with your mouth, and teach you what you are to say.
God’s response

Jeremiah the Slightly Less Resistant Prophet
Jeremiah 1:4-5 NASB
4

Now the word of the LORD came to me saying,

5

“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,

and before you were born I consecrated you;
I have appointed you a prophet to the nations.”
The commission

Jeremiah 1:6a NIV*
Look, I don’t know how to speak!
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

First objection

Jeremiah 1:6b NIV
I am too young!
Second objection

Jeremiah 1:7-9 NASB

Class Notes: Jonah

61 of 161

7

“Do not say, ‘I am too young,’ because everywhere I send you, you shall go.

8

And all that I command you, you shall speak ...”

9

Then the LORD stretched out his hand and touched my mouth, and the LORD said to me, “Behold, I have

put my words in your mouth.”
God’s response

Elijah the Disillusioned Death-Wish Prophet
1 Kings 17:1-2 NASB
1

Now Elijah the Tishbite, was of the settlers of Gilead ...

2

The word of the LORD came to him ...

The commission

1 Kings 19:1-4 NASB
1

Now Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword.

2

Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, “So may the gods do to me and even more, if I do not
make your life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time.”

3

And he was afraid and arose and

ran for his life and came to Beersheba, which belongs to Judah, and left his servant there.

4

But he himself

went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree; and he requested his
life, that he might die, and said, “It is enough; now, O LORD, take my life, for I am not better than my
fathers.”
After his unsuccessful mission on Mount Carmel

Jonah the Utterly Rebellious Prophet
Jonah 4:3, 8 NASB*
3

“Take my life, for better is my death than my life!” ...

8

And he requested his his life to die,

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

After his successful mission in Nineveh

Jonah is an extreme character among the prophets, taking the motif of the resistant prophet to the next level.
He is more resistant to his call than Moses or Jeremiah, and he is more comic than Elijah in that he too wants
to die, but only after an outstanding success in his prophetic calling.

Reflection Question
How is Jonah like Moses or Jeremiah?

Class Notes: Jonah

62 of 161

