Session 22: Why Does Jonah Flee to Tarshish?

Key Takeaways
Concentric symmetry is when the center of a movement acts as a moment of emphasis or highlight.
Jonah was the last prophet to prophecy the restoration of Israel’s borders to an Eden-like proportion,
but that was all reversed by Babylon in the next generation.
All mentions of “the ships of Tarshish” in the Hebrew Bible are negative. Tarshish is the place people go
to build their false Edens.

Jonah’s Commission: Translation and Literary Design of Jonah 1:1-3

1 The word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai saying,
2 “ Arise ,

go to Nineveh the great city
and call out against it,
for their wickedness has come up before me.”

a 3 And Jonah arose to flee to Tarshish from before the face of Yahweh .
b

And he went down to Joppa,
c and he found a ship
d which was going to Tarshish
c' and he paid the fare

b'

and he went down into it

a' to go with them to Tarshish from before the face of Yahweh .

Jonah 1:1-3. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jonah (2019)

Jonah’s Name (1:1)
“Jonah, son of Amittai” = “dove, son of faithfulness”
Faithfulness = ‫ אמתי‬/ yonah = dove / ‫יונה‬

Jonah, Prophet of God’s Mercy and Israel’s Restoration

Class Notes: Jonah

51 of 161

Jonah first appears in 2 Kings 14:25-26, where he prophesied that the borders of Israel would be restored to
their original borders from the days of Solomon, which happened during the reign of Jeroboam II. However,
the narrator also makes clear that Jeroboam II “did evil in the eyes of Yahweh” in perpetuating the sins of
Jeroboam I (2 Kgs. 14:24), so there is more than meets the eye here.

Jonah’s Prophecy and God’s Mercy on Sinful Israel
Narrative

2 Kings 13: Reign of Jehoahaz

2 Kings 14: Reign of Jeroboam II

Apostate King of

13:2: [Jehoahaz] did evil in the eyes of

14:24: [Jeroboam II] did evil in the eyes

Northern Israel

Yahweh and he followed the sins of

of Yahweh, he did not turn away from

Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he

the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat,

caused Israel to sin.

which he caused Israel to sin.

Judgment and Oppression

Blessing and Victory?!

13:3: And the anger of Yahweh was hot

14:25: He restored the border of Israel

against Israel and he gave them into the

from the entrance of Hamath as far as

hand of Hazael king of Aram and into

the Sea of the Arabah, according to the

the hand of Ben-Hadad son of Hazael …

word of the Lord, the God of Israel,

Yahweh’s
Response

13:22: Now Hazael king of Aram had
oppressed Israel all the days of
Jehoahaz.

Repentance of

13:4a: Then Jehoahaz appeased the

the King

face of Yahweh and Yahweh listened to

which he spoke through his servant
Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet,
who was of Gath-hepher.

No repentance!

him.

Divine Mercy

13:4b: Because [Yahweh] saw the

14:26-27a: For the Lord saw the

oppression of Israel, which the king of

affliction of Israel, which was very

Aram oppressed them.

bitter; for there was neither bond nor

13:23a: But Yahweh was gracious to
them and had compassion on them and
turned toward them because of his
covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and

free, nor was there any helper for Israel.
The Lord did not say that he would blot
out the name of Israel from under
heaven ...

Jacob, and he would not destroy them
…

Jonah’s Prophecy and God’s Mercy on Sinful Israel. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Jonah (2019).

Class Notes: Jonah

52 of 161

Narrative

2 Kings 13: Reign of Jehoahaz

2 Kings 14: Reign of Jeroboam II

Provision of a

13:5: And Yahweh provided for Israel a

14:27b: But he delivered them by the

Deliverer

deliverer and they went out from under

hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.

the hand of Aram and the sons of Israel
sat in their tents as in former times.

Jonah’s Prophecy and God’s Mercy on Sinful Israel. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Jonah (2019).

In the sequence of 2 Kings 13-14, we have two contrasting generations of Israelite kings. Jehoahaz is wicked,
but he appeals to Yahweh’s mercy (in the language of Exodus 34:6), so Yahweh delivers Israel in his
generation. Contrast this with Jeroboam II, who is also wicked but does not repent, yet Yahweh blesses him
with victory and divine mercy with the prophetic support of Jonah ben Amittai.
The author of Jonah assumes a knowledge of this section of 2 Kings and builds his portrait of Jonah in light of
this story of undeserved divine mercy to sinful kingdoms.
“If God just goes around forgiving everybody all the time, what’s the point of doing anything? If
disobedience goes cavalierly unpunished, then the idea of obedience ceases to have meaning, and this is
why Jonah ends up in the grip of a deathwish in Jonah ch. 4 ... [I]n Jonah’s perception, the deity has
sovereign power over everything but himself, a situation that allows sin to flourish unchecked and sinners
(like Jeroboam or the Ninevites) to reap rewards.”
Muldoon, Catherine (2016). “In Defense of Divine Justice: An Intertextual Approach to the Book of Jonah.”
Journal of Hebrew Scriptures, vol. 16. 120-121.

Jonah’s Prophecy and the Garden of Eden
The restoration of the borders in 2 Kings 14:24-26 links back to the borders of Israel realized only in the time of
Solomon, which themselves go back to the land borders promised to Abraham in Genesis 15, and even further
back to the borders of Eden in Genesis 2.
Genesis 2:10-14 NASB
10

Now a river flowed out of Eden to water the garden; and from there it divided and became four rivers.

The name of the first is Pishon; it flows around the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
that land is good; the bdellium and the onyx stone are there.
flows around the whole land of Cush.

14

13

12

11

The gold of

The name of the second river is Gihon; it

The name of the third river is Tigris; it flows east of Assyria. And the

fourth river is the Euphrates.
1 Kings 4:21 NASB
Now Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the river to the land of the Philistines and to the border of
Egypt; they brought tribute and served Solomon all the days of his life.

Class Notes: Jonah

53 of 161

Genesis 15:18 NASB
On that day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying,
“To your descendants I have given this land,
from the river of Egypt as far as the great river, the river Euphrates:”
1 Kings 8:65 NIV
So Solomon observed the festival at that time, and all Israel with him—a vast assembly, people from Lebo
Hamath to the Wadi of Egypt.
Joshua 1:4 NIV
Your territory will extend from the desert to Lebanon, and from the great river, the Euphrates—all the
Hittite country—to the Mediterranean Sea in the west.
2 Kings 14:25 NIV
[Jeroboam ben Joash] was the one who restored the boundaries of Israel from Lebo Hamath to the Dead
Sea, in accordance with the word of the LORD, the God of Israel, spoken through his servant Jonah son of
Amittai, the prophet from Gath Hepher.
These links are all connected to the promise to Abraham, that his seed would inherit a land whose borders
resemble the land encompassed by the rivers of Eden in Genesis 2. These borders are what Joshua is told to
possess and what Solomon reigns over for a short period until losing the north to Aram (1 Kgs. 11:23-25).
Ironically, it is Jeroboam II who restores the Eden-like borders of Israel, as prophesied by Jonah son of Amittai.

Jonah’s Prophecy and Jeroboam’s Victory Reversed
It’s crucially important to note that Jeroboam’s border restoration and Jonah’s prophecy are intentionally
reversed by an oracle from the prophet Amos. So whatever positive associations we had in 2 Kings 14 must be
tempered by the eventual reversal of Jonah’s prophecy brought on by Israel’s apostasy.
2 Kings 14:24-25 NASB
24

Jeroboam did evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of

Nebat, which he made Israel sin.

25

He restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath as far as

the Sea of the Arabah, according to the word of the LORD, the God of Israel, which he spoke through his
servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was of Gath-hepher.
Amos 6:13-14 NASB
13

You who rejoice in Lodebar,

and say, “Have we not by our own strength taken Karnaim for ourselves?”
14

“For behold, I am going to raise up a nation against you,

O house of Israel,” declares the LORD God of hosts,
"And they will afflict you from the entrance of Hamath
to the brook of the Arabah.”

Class Notes: Jonah

54 of 161

The nation that God will use to reverse Jonah’s prophecy and fulfill Amos’ warning is none other than Assyria,
who will eventually destroy the entire northern kingdom of Israel.
2 Kings 15:27-29 NASB
27

In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah son of Remaliah became king over Israel in

Samaria, and reigned twenty years.

28

He did evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not depart from the sins

of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he made Israel sin.
29

In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came and captured Ijon and Abel-beth-

maacah and Janoah and Kedesh and Hazor and Gilead and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and he carried
them captive to Assyria.
2 Kings 16:9 NASB
[Then] ... the king of Assyria went up against Damascus and captured it, and carried the people of it away
into exile to Kir, and put Rezin to death.

Nineveh, the Great City
The phrase “Nineveh, the great city” appears four times in Jonah (Jon. 1:2; 3:2, 3; 4:11) and only elsewhere in
Genesis 10 in a crucially important story about the founding of Babylon and Nineveh.
Genesis 10:10-12 NASB*
10

The beginning of [Nimrod’s] kingdom was Babylon and Erek and Akkad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

11

From that land Asshur went out, and he built Nineveh and the wideness-of-city and Calah,

12

and Resen

between Nineveh and Calah; that is the great city.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Asshur’s kingdom consists of four cities, just as Nimrod’s Babylon. From this point on, these two empires will
loom in the background until Assyria appears in 2 Kings 15 (right after Jonah) as a precursor to the Babylonian
threat.
“The deliberate association of Assyria with Babylon (in Gen 10:11-12) is significant; otherwise, in the lists of
names which follow, Assyria is associated with the sons of Shem (Gen 10:22). By means of this narrative
insertion, then, the author has not only introduced a key city, Babylon, but has also taken Assyria out of its
natural associations with Shem and given it a new identification with Babylon. Thus the author has opened
the way for an association and identification of other cities with Babylon. These appear to be the initial
stirrings of a larger-than life symbolic value for Babylon, one known in a fully developed sense in the book
of Isaiah (chs. 13-14 where Assyria is identified with Babylon), and in Micah 5:6, where the prophet could
speak of Assyria as the 'land of Nimrod.'”
Sailhamer, John H. (1995). The Pentateuch as Narrative: A Biblical-Theological Commentary. Zondervan
Academic. 132.

Rising Evil
Class Notes: Jonah

55 of 161

The phrase “their evil has risen up before me” connects to an important biblical design pattern of the evil
human city whose violence forms an outcry that rises up to God.
Genesis 4:10 NASB*
The blood of your brother is crying out to me (‫ )צעקים אלי‬from the ground.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Cain and Abel and Cain’s city of violence

Genesis 6:13 NASB*
The end of all flesh has come before me (‫)לפני בא‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The generation of the flood

Genesis 18:20-21 NASB*
20

The outcry (‫ )זעקה‬against Sodom and Gomorrah, it is great and their sin is extremely heavy.

21

I will go

down now and I will see if its outcry (‫ )צעקה‬which has come to me (‫ )אלי הבאה‬they have done, totally.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Sodom and Gomorrah

Exodus 2:23 NASB*
And they cried out (‫ )זעק‬and their outcry rose up to God (‫ אל אלהים‬... ‫ )ותעל‬from their slavery.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The Israelites in Egypt

Jonah 1:2 NASB*
For their evil has risen up before me.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Ninevah

In each of these stories, God raises up a deliverer/intercessor who either:
1. Confronts the evil-doers and calls them to repent (Moses in Egypt), or
2. Pleads with God on behalf of the wicked (Noah’s sacrifice, Abraham’s intercession)
But this is not the case with Jonah.

Jonah’s Flight from God
Class Notes: Jonah

56 of 161

Jonah 1:3 NASB*
And Jonah arose to flee ... from before the face of Yahweh (‫)יהוה מלפני‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The phrase “from before the face of Yahweh” refers to the divine presence and appears 16 times in the
Hebrew Bible. The first time is in the story of Cain’s exile east of Eden after his brother’s blood cries out from
the ground. This interpretation is confirmed by the fact that the author returns to a series of clear analogies
between Jonah and Cain in Jonah 4.
Genesis 4:16 NASB*
And he went out from before the face of Yahweh (‫)מלפני יהוה‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Cain's exile from Eden

Jonah 1:3 NASB*
And Jonah arose to flee ... from before the face of Yahweh (‫)יהוה מלפני‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Jonah's flight from God

Cain in Genesis 4
Genesis 4:4b-5 Instructor’s Translation
4b

And Yahweh regarded Abel and his offering,

5

but Cain and his offering he did not regard, and there was

heat-anger to Cain (-‫)ל ויחר‬.
Genesis 4:6-7 Instructor’s Translation
6

“Why is there heat-anger to you (‫?)לך חרה‬

7

Isn’t it the case that if you do good (‫ )תיטיב‬there is exaltation?”

Genesis 4:16 NASB*
And Cain went out (‫ )ויצא‬from before the face of Yahweh and he sat (‫ )וישב‬in the land of Nod, to the east of
Eden (‫)עדן קדמת‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Genesis 4:17 Instructor’s Translation
And he built a city and called the name of the city according to the name of his son Enoch.

Jonah in Jonah 4
Jonah 4:1 Instructor’s Translation

Class Notes: Jonah

57 of 161

And [God’s showing mercy to Nineveh] was evil to Jonah, a great evil, and there was heat-anger to him (

-‫)ל ויחר‬.
Jonah 4:4 Instructor’s Translation
And Yahweh said, “Is it doing good that there is heat-anger to you (‫לך‬i ‫ההיטב‬i ‫”?)חרה‬
Jonah 4:5 Instructor’s Translation
And Jonah went out (‫ )ויצא‬from the city and he sat from the east of the city (‫ )מקדם וישב‬and made for
himself a sukkah and he sat (‫ )וישב‬under it.
The phrase “from before the face of Yahweh” also refers to the divine presence in the tabernacle (Num. 17:7,
20:9; 1 Sam. 21:7), divine judgment/fire (Lev. 9:24, 10:2), and incense (Num. 16:40; Lev. 16:12). This instance in
Jonah matches Cain’s closely, especially in light of the Cain analogies at work in chapter 4.

Going to Tarshish
Tarshish has two main associations.
1. An exotic, distant nation: The name appears for the first time among the sons of Japeth (Gen. 10:4)
among the distant island nations (with Elisha, Kittim, Dodanim).
2. A place of gold and precious gems: The name also refers to a precious stone that, according to Ezekiel,
endowed the garden of Eden with its majestic splendor (Ezek. 28:13).
When these associations are combined, we can see Tarshish as a source of wealth and resources that people
use to create their own versions of Eden, which then subjects them to judgment.
1 Kings 10:22 NASB
For the king [Solomon] had at sea the ships of Tarshish with the ships of Hiram; once every three years the
ships of Tarshish came bringing gold and silver, ivory and apes and peacocks.
1 Kings 22:48 NASB
Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, but they did not go for the ships were broken
at Ezion-geber.
Just as in Jonah 1:4

The “ships of Tarshish” are a source of wealth, idolatry, and pagan influence in Israel and, therefore, a target
for Yahweh’s justice.
Isaiah 2:12, 16 Instructor’s Translation
12

For Yahweh of armies has a day ...

16

against all the ships of Tarshish, and against all the desirable ships.

Isaiah 23:1 Instructor’s Translation
Wail, O ships of Tarshish,
for Tyre is destroyed without house or harbor;

Class Notes: Jonah

58 of 161

Psalm 48:4-5, 7 Instructor's Translation
4

The kings assemble themselves together ...

5

They saw and were stunned ...

7

With the east wind

you break the ships of Tarshish.
Just as in Jonah 1:4

But Tarshish is eventually redeemed. The new Jerusalem will receive the gold from the ships of Tarshish (
Isa. 60:9, 72:10). And in the messianic age, the witnesses will go out to the islands, including Tarshish (
Isa. 66:19).
Tarshish plays the role of a pseudo-Eden, a place for precious stones that is exploited by human scheming
(ships and trade routes). The destroyed ships of Tarshish become an image of God defeating humanity’s
search for Eden life on their own terms.
Jonah flees to Tarshish just as all biblical characters attempt some kind of “return to Eden” by their own power
and scheming.

Reflection Question
In the biblical story, what kind of a place is Tarshish? What does it mean that Jonah flees there? Do you think
this is a point that would be helpful for those in your context?

Class Notes: Jonah

59 of 161

