Session 37: Jonah’s Five-Word Sermon to the
Ninevites

Key Takeaways
Jonah’s sermon is not typical of a prophet. It is only five words, and he doesn’t warn the people or urge
them to turn back to Yahweh like other Hebrew prophets.
Jonah’s sermon presents us with a comic contrast. Despite Jonah doing little to warn the people, they
still turn back to Yahweh. This creates a strong contrast between the character of Jonah and the
Ninevites.
In the story, everyone is awake to God except Jonah.

Jonah’s Five-Word Sermon
Jonah 3:4 NASB*
Yet forty days, and Nineveh is overturned (nehpaket / ‫)נהפכת‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The root hapak (‫ )הפך‬is overwhelmingly connected to the story of Sodom and Gomorrah’s destruction
throughout the Hebrew Bible.
Genesis 19:24-25, 29 NASB
24

Then the LORD rained on Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven,

25

and

he overthrew those cities, and all the valley, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and what grew on the
ground. ...

29

Thus it came about, when God destroyed the cities of the valley, that God remembered

Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot lived.
Deuteronomy 29:23 NASB
All its land is brimstone and salt, a burning waste, unsown and unproductive, and no grass grows in it, like
the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which the LORD overthrew in his anger and in
his wrath.
Isaiah 13:19 NASB
And Babylon, the beauty of kingdoms, the glory of the Chaldeans’ pride,
will be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
Jeremiah 49:17-18 NASB

Class Notes: Jonah

120 of 161

17

”Edom will become an object of horror; everyone who passes by it will be horrified and will hiss at all its

wounds.

18

Like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah with its neighbors,” says the LORD, “no one will live

there, nor will a son of man reside in it.”
Amos 4:10-11 NASB*
10

“I sent a plague among you after the manner of Egypt ...

yet you have not repented to me,” declares the LORD.
11

“I overthrew you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah ...

yet you have not repented to me,” declares the LORD.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

However, the verb hapak can also be used in a more general sense of “turned over,” and mean to transform or
change.
Deuteronomy 23:5 NIV*
The LORD your God would not listen to Balaam but changed the curse into a blessing for you
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Amos 5:8 NASB
He who made the Pleiades and Orion,
and changes deep darkness into morning,
who also darkens day into night
Psalm 30:11 NIV
You changed my wailing into dancing;
you removed my sackcloth and clothed me with joy
1 Samuel 10:6 NASB
Then the Spirit of the LORD will come upon you mightily, and you shall prophesy with them and be changed
into another man.

Interpretive Challenges with Jonah’s Short Sermon
Jonah obeys the second divine commission to go to Nineveh, but does he announce the message God gave
to him?
Jonah predicts the “overturning” of Nineveh within forty days, which he clearly intends as an announcement
of destruction. If this was in fact Yahweh’s message given to Jonah, it was either inaccurate or it failed to be
fulfilled. If Yahweh’s truthfulness is to be upheld, then there are a few logical options for interpretation (see
Ray Lubeck, "Prophetic Sabotage: A Look at Jonah 3:2-4," 37-38).

A Conditional Threat
Class Notes: Jonah

121 of 161

Jonah did deliver Yahweh’s message exactly as he received it, but he, Yahweh, the Ninevites, and we as
readers are meant to understand it as something else—a conditional threat that will not be carried out if
Nineveh repents.
“That this was [Yahweh’s] message ... is self-evident since it was the message which Jonah actually
delivered.”
Zlotowitz, Meir (1980). Yonah: A New Translation With a Commentary Anthologized from Talmudic, Midrashic
and Rabbinic Sources. Messorah Publications. 119.
“[T]hese words are not what Jonah composed, but are exactly what Yahweh told him to say.”
Stuart, Douglas (1987). Word Biblical Commentary Vol. 31, Hosea-Jonah. Thomas Nelson. 489.

Problem
The king clearly understands the oracle as an irreversible prediction of judgment (3:8-9: “Let each man turn
from his wicked way! Who knows, God might turn and relent!”). While prophets recognize that oracles of
judgment might be averted by repentance (Jer. 18:7-10), those oracles are almost always accompanied by a
call to repent.

A Justifiable Threat
Jonah delivered the message as given to him by God, but he knew beforehand that it was false (so he fled as
he says in 4:2). Yahweh never intended to execute this overturning, but his threat is justifiable on the grounds
that it achieved a higher good, the repentance of the Ninevites.
“[T]he biblical story is not about a prophet but about an unfulfilled prophecy. God’s wonderful graciousness
here explains the failure of Jonah’s prediction.”
Bickerman, Elias (1985). Four Strange Books of the Bible: Jonah, Daniel, Koheleth, Esther. Shocken. 32.
“This is the mysterious paradox of Hebrew faith: The All-wise and Almighty may change a word that He
proclaims.”
Heschel, Abraham J. (2001). The Prophets. Harper Perennial Modern Classics. 28.

Problem
This interpretation technically makes Jonah a false prophet (a big deal in Deuteronomy 18), intentionally
proclaiming a word he knows is not true. It also portrays God as bearing false witness.

An Abbreviated Sermon
Jonah did not utter the message Yahweh gave him but altered or abbreviated it to suit his own purposes.
Instead of delivering an original, conditional message of judgment and repentance, Jonah stated the oracle so

Class Notes: Jonah

122 of 161

that the Ninevites would understand it as a pronouncement of irrevocable judgment.

Problems
This portrays Jonah as being in a state of continued rebellion and disobedience to God, which is entirely
possible.
“This portrays Jonah as distorting God’s word.” Exactly! Jonah is consistently portrayed as an unreliable
character whose words evade every person who speaks with him (the sailors in 1:8-9 and God in 4:3-4
and 4:8-9).

God Teaching Jonah
Jonah faithfully uttered the message, but God is continuing to “teach a lesson” to Jonah. The message is
worded ambiguously so that Jonah will think “overturned” means “destroyed,” whereas God knows that it
means “changed,” anticipating Nineveh’s response.

Problems (and Solutions)
This view depicts God as a trickster who knows Jonah will be motivated by a message of destruction.
But by capitalizing on the potential double meaning, God can be faithful to the word of the prophet
while also overcoming Jonah’s hatred.
This “divine trick” prepares us for the next lesson for Jonah in chapter 4: the vine, the worm, and the
wind.
“The ambiguity of ‘overturned’ amounts to a kind of pun. The word can mean to overthrow and destroy, but
also to turn over, around, so that one thing becomes another ... Some such transformation or conversion ...
seems to be what the Lord had in mind, if indeed these are the exact words given to Jonah to speak. So it
may be that the Lord has fooled Jonah, giving him a message containing more good news than Jonah
realizes. We need not suppose that the God of the Bible is above such fooling. Think of how he plays
Pharaoh in the story of the Exodus, by at first proposing just a brief trip of three days for the Israelites (like
Jonah’s time in the fish!) to worship their God ... God outwits and out maneuvers him, luring him into a trap
to overcome his evil ... So too with Jonah, and we can imagine ancient Israelites telling this story aloud and
chuckling. It’s not as if Pharaoh, or Jonah, didn’t deserve it.”
Cary, Phillip (2008), Jonah. Brazos Press. 109.
“By the end of the third chapter (in fact, as soon as v 5 tells us that the Ninevites ‘believed in God’), God
becomes more playful with Jonah, more tolerant of his caustic responses, more willing to indulge his
stubbornness. As we shall also see, the narrative itself becomes more whimsical; more indulgent, I may say,
in that it veers from attacking issues frontally. As we observe this shift in character, mood, and temper, we
begin to wonder whether God’s great deeds at sea, below waters, and within Nineveh are but mere exhibits
for a prophet’s education. All these modifications will be necessary because, to the last, the narrator needs
to keep Jonah oblivious of the little games that Hebrew words can play.”
Sasson, Jack M. (1995). Jonah. Yale University Press. 268.

Class Notes: Jonah

123 of 161

Reflection Question
What do you make of Jonah’s short sermon to the Ninevites? What does Jonah not say to the Ninevites that we
might expect him to say?

Class Notes: Jonah

124 of 161

