Session 25: Reflections on Heaven Coming to Earth

Key Takeaways
The cosmic mountain, Eden, the temple, and the tabernacle were all symbols pointing toward an
ultimate reality. Jesus, in human form, claims to be this ultimate reality.
Heaven is the ultimate cause and source of all life, but it is invisible and inaccessible unless we have our
imaginations transformed.

Reflections on Heaven and Earth
“Christians have a long tradition of adjusting and translating from biblical to contemporary cosmologies,
often without realizing it. In the history of Christianity, the ancient Israelite cosmology gave way to the
Ptolemaic cosmology, which dominated Christian thought for centuries. [Ptolemaic cosmology was earthcentric but envisioned the earth as a globe.] Most Christians did not even notice that a shift had taken
place. And once Copernican cosmology finally supplanted the Ptolemaic, Christians had little trouble
adapting to that either ... Remember, in the biblical texts, the symbolic meaning of the image of Heaven
above had always been the most important thing about such language. Height or depth spoke of relative
importance and rank … and for the biblical authors, the idea of Heaven being 'above' the rest of creation
meant that Heaven was the most important dimension of the created world, because from that high and
exalted place God ruled over all things. Interpreting the language of the high Heaven non-geographically
does not threaten the heart of this biblical teaching at all—the truth Scripture pointed to was always that
Heaven is invisible and inaccessible to humans, and yet is at the heart of creation because divine life and
rule flow from it. Whether or not Heaven is also literally above the sky is incidental to the truth that
Scripture points towards.”
Parry, Robin A. (2014). The Biblical Cosmos: A Pilgrim's Guide to the Weird and Wonderful World of the Bible.
Wipf and Stock Publishers. 180-181.

This session has no other notes

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

102 of 141

Reflection Question
This session concludes our tour through the biblical cosmos—the skies, land, light, raqia’, waters above, seas,
rivers, dry land, and the heavens. Which idea so far has been the most transformative for you?

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

103 of 141

