Session 6: Genesis 1 Is an Ancient Israelite
Cosmology

Key Takeaways
In Hebrew, the word for “earth” typically means “land,” rather than a globe or sphere floating in space.
So when you read Genesis 1, imagine the story communicating about the land the people live on.
God names the raqia’ the shamayim—the Hebrew word for “skies” or “heavens.”
In the Bible, the raqia’ is the solid dome above the land that holds back the waters above, and the
creation of the raqia’ creates a place where life can flourish.
In the biblical view, God graciously sustains the raqia’, keeping its floodgates closed so that the Earth
will never again be destroyed (Gen. 9:11).

“Earth” in Genesis 1:1-2
In Hebrew, ’erets (‫ )ארץ‬does not mean “globe-earth.” This is a modern meaning of the English word “earth” that
depends on the concept of the planet as a sphere. This concept was not available to the biblical authors at
the time.

Left image: U.S. Army (1946). Wikimedia Commons. Right image: Anders, William (1968). Wikimedia Commons

These photos are fascinating but totally irrelevant for understanding what the ancient Hebrew word ’erets
means in Genesis 1.
There are no uses of ’erets in the Hebrew Bible that describe the land as a sphere. Rather, the word’s meaning
describes the land that is below the skies and the clouds.
Psalm 102:19 NASB

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

19 of 141

For [God] looked down from his holy height; from heaven the LORD gazed upon the 'erets.
Psalm 103:11 NASB
For as high as the heavens are above the ‘erets, so great is his lovingkindness toward those who fear him.
By looking at the biblical usage of ‘erets, we can see that a more appropriate English word for translating
’erets would be “land.”

“Firmament/Expanse/Vault/Dome” in Genesis 1:6-8
In Hebrew, raqia’ refers to a solid blue dome above the land, above which are presumed to be waters. The
English word “dome” is an accurate rendering of the word based on its other uses in the biblical text.

The Noun Raqia'
Genesis 1:6-8 NASB*
6

And God said, “Let there be a raqia' in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the

water.”

7

God made the raqia', and separated the water which were below the raqia' from the waters which

were above the raqia'; and it was so.

8

God called the raqia' “heavens.” And there was evening and there

was morning, a second day.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Genesis 1:20 NASB*
And God said, “... and let the birds fly over the land against the surface of the raqia' ...”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Ezekiel 1:22, 26 NASB*
22

And there was something like a raqia' over the heads of the living creatures, like the appearance of ice,

stretched out over their heads above ...

26

and above the raqia' that was over their heads something like

blue sapphire, the appearance of a throne ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

20 of 141

Separation of Waters. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth (2019).

The Verb Raqa’
In Hebrew, raqa’ means “to hammer out, smooth, spread out.”
Exodus 39:3 NASB*
And they [the craftsmen] raqa'd smooth sheets of gold, and they cut them into cords to be woven together
with blue and purple and scarlet ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Numbers 16:39 NASB*
So Eleazer the priest took the bronze censers which the men who were burned had offered, and they
raqa'd them out as a plating for the altar ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Isaiah 40:19 NASB*
As for the idol, a craftsman casts it, a goldsmith raqa's it with gold ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Isaiah 42:5 NASB*
Thus says God the LORD,
who created the heavens and stretched them out,
who raqa'd the land and what springs up from it,

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

21 of 141

who gives breath to the people on it
and spirit to those who walk in it ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The Windows of the Raqia’
The raqia' is a solid blue dome between the land and the cosmic waters, which are released over the land
through windows in the raqia’.
Genesis 7:11 NASB*
In the sixth hundreth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the seventeeth day of the month, on the
same day all the fountains of the great deep burst open, and the windows of the skies were opened.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Reflection Question
What does the word “earth” mean in the biblical text? What is the raqia’, and what does it do?

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

22 of 141

