Session 15: Relationships Between Days

Key Takeaways
Days one through three describe the environments that God creates, and days four through six
describe the inhabitants. Creation is all about ordering and populating the skies and the land.
Days four and six repeat the similar theme of rulers. Day four is about the rulers above, and day six is
about the rulers below.
The story culminates in the creation of the human rulers below who will partner with God.

The Cosmos of Genesis 1: Days One Through Six
Days One Through Three
Days one through six have been neatly organized as two triads that each address the problems presented in
Genesis 1:2—disorder and emptiness.
Days one through three address the problem of creation being unordered and uninhabited as God organizes
the cosmos into distinct realms: the heavens above, the middle heaven/earth, and the land below.

Days Four Through Six
Days four through six supply each of these realms with their appropriate inhabitants: the heavenly realm with
lights, the middle heaven/earth with birds and fish, and the dry land with creatures and humans.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

48 of 141

Origami of Genesis 1. Adapted from David Andrew Teeter by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Design Structure of Days One Through Three

Day 1: God Orders the Heavens
3 And God said,

" Let there be light ";

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

49 of 141

and there was light.
4 God saw that the light was good ;

and God separated the light from the darkness .
A

5 And God called the light

day ,

and the darkness he called night .

And there was evening
and there was morning,
one day (‫ )יום אחד‬.

Day 2: God Commands the Chaos Waters To Be Split
6 And God said,

“Let there be a dome
in the middle of the waters,
and let it separate the waters
from the waters."

7 And God made the dome ,

and separated the waters
B

which were below the dome
from the waters
which were above the

dome ;

and it was so.
8 God called the dome

skies .

And there was evening
and there was morning,
a second day .

Day 3: God Orders the Land
9 And God said,

“ Let

the waters below the skies

be gathered into one place (‫ )מקום אחד‬,
and let

the dry ground

be seen";

and it was so.
10 And God called the dry ground land,

and the gathering of the waters he called seas.
God saw that it was good. .

11 And God said,

“Let the land sprout vegetation,

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

50 of 141

vegetative plants that produce seed ,
fruit trees
that make fruit according to its kind

A'

which has its seed inside it
upon the land ";
and it was so.
12 And the land brought out

vegetative plants
that produce seed according to its kind,
and trees
that make fruit
which has its seed in it,
according to its kind;
and God saw that it was good .

13 And there was evening

and there was morning,
a third day .

Genesis 1-2:3. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth
(2020).
This design structure invites the reader to compare and contrast the matching elements.
Days one and three both portray God as addressing the two most iconic images of disorder, chaos, and
death in the biblical imagination: darkness and the waters (note that they were already paired in 1:2). We
are encouraged to see both as corresponding images of anti-creation.
Day two is set apart from days one and three because it has the most elaborate “command/fulfillment”
structure of the three days. While days one and three each have a command and a short fulfillment, day
two has a lengthy, repetitive command followed by an equally lengthy fulfillment. But note that the two
halves match, nearly identically. This is a literary embodiment of the theme of day two, which is the
complete division between the heavenly and earthly by splitting the waters.
The reader walks away from days one through three with a robust awareness of the makeup of the biblical
cosmos.
Heaven and Earth are mirror realities. The provision of divine light contains the darkness and creates
the most basic condition necessary for life to flourish. In a similar way, the provision of the land on Earth
pushes back the waters, creating a space where life can flourish.
God’s “conflict” with the darkness is a foundational image of the spiritual conflict that underlies the
story of the Bible. Similarly, God and humanity’s conflict with the chaos-waters can function as an
image of the human conflict (the metaphor scheme of humans as chaos waters).
God’s victory over darkness on day one and the waters on day three happens by speaking a word. Day
two focuses on God’s splitting the waters, again by speaking a word. But this is followed by an act of
creation as God separates the chaos waters.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

51 of 141

Every single part of this network of images will be developed throughout the remainder of the biblical
narrative.
Waters // darkness // death // enemies
Dry land // light // life // refuge
God splitting the waters to create life // God’s victory over chaos and evil
We are invited to consider the design of days four through six in a similar way. And the comparisons and
contrasts will again yield rich results about biblical imagery.

Design Structure of Days Four Through Six

Day 4: God Delegates Heavenly Rulers
14 And God said,

" Let there be lights
in the expanse of the skies
to separate the day from the night ,
and let them be for signs
and for festivals and for days and years;
15 and let them be for lights

in the dome of the skies
to give light on the land”;
and it was so.
16 And God made the two great lights ,

A

the great light to rule the day ,
and the small light to rule the night ;
and also the stars.
17 And God placed them

in the dome of the skies
to give light on the land,
18 and to rule the day and the night ,

and to separate the light from the darkness ;
and God saw that it was good .

19 And there was evening

and there was morning,
a fourth day .

Day 5: God Apportions the Waters Above and Below
20 And God said,

“Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures,
A

and let birds fly above the land

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

52 of 141

against the face of the

dome of the skies ."

21 And God created the great sea monsters

and every living creature that moves,
B

with which the waters swarmed after their kind,
and every bird of wing after its kind;

B

and God saw that it was good .

22 And God blessed them, saying,

“Be fruitful and multiply,

A'

and fill the waters in the seas,
and let birds multiply on the land.”

23 And there was evening

and there was morning,
a fifth day .

Day 6: God Delegates Earthly Rulers
24 And God said,

“ Let

the land bring out living creatures

according to their kind,
cattle
and creeping things
and beasts of the land
according to their kind”;
and it was so.

25 And God made

the beasts of the land
according to their kind,
and the cattle
according to their kind,
and the creepers of the ground
according to its kind;
and God saw that it was good.

26 And God said,

"Let us make human
in our image,
according to our likeness;
and let them rule
over the fish of the sea

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

53 of 141

and over the birds of the sky
and over the cattle
and over all the land
and over every creeper that creeps on

the land ."

27 And God created human in his image,

A'

in the image of God he created him ;
male and female he created them .

28 And God blessed them ,

"Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the land,
and subdue it;
and rule
over the fish of the sea
and over the birds of the sky
and over every living creature that creeps on

the land ."

29 And God said,

“Behold, I have given to you
every plant producing seed
that is on the surface of all the earth,
and every tree which has fruit producing seed ;
it shall be food for you;
30 and to every beast of the land

and to every bird of the sky
and to every thing that moves on the land
which has animal life in it,
every green plant for food”;
and it was so.

31 And God saw all that he had made,

and behold, it was very good.

And there was evening
and there was morning,
a sixth day .

Genesis 1-2:3. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth
(2020).
This design structure invites the reader to make new contrasts and comparisons.
God’s delegated rulers mirror each other. On day four, the sun and moon rule day and night. Note that
the stars are not included in the delegated rule; rather, they make up the part that is ruled (the darkness

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

54 of 141

and night). Similarly, on day six, the man and woman function as a ruling pair over the land and animals.
This last point fosters the comparison between the objects in the heavenly and earthly realm that are
subjected to the rule of God’s images: the stars and the animals (consider how these implicitly come
together in Gen. 3).
Notice how all three days have an extra created object that sticks out of the other lists: the stars (// the
rulers), the sea monsters (// Leviathan), and the cattle (// Behemoth).
When this overlapping set of design structures are laid on top of each other, we can see what scholar David
Andrew Teeter calls “literary origami.” The six days of Genesis 1 are arranged along two “folds,” a vertical axis
that forms two matching triads, and a horizontal axis that forms each triad into a mirror shape.

Reflection Question
Summarize what you learned about the structure of days one through six in Genesis 1.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

55 of 141

