Session 27: The Rulers Below

Key Takeaways
Humans are meant to image or mirror God (Gen. 1:26-27).
Humans image God by their unity and diversity as one humanity made of male and female (Gen. 1:2627).
God is dianthropic—he desires and designs to work through (Grk. dia) human beings (Grk. anthropos).
Humans image God by ruling, or cultivating, creation as partners with God.
God imparts a huge amount of dignity to humanity by appointing them to rule as his partners.

Humanity in Genesis 1 (Anthropology)
Within the framework of the six days of Genesis 1, the appointment of humanity as God’s image is clearly the
climactic act of God’s work because it’s saved for last. The key moment in Genesis 1:26-28 is designed as a
literary symmetry.

Day 6: God Delegates Earthly Rulers
26 And God said,

"Let us make human
in our image,
according to our likeness;
and let them rule
over the fish of the sea
and over the birds of the sky
and over the cattle
and over all the land
and over every creeper that creeps on

A'

the land ."

27 And God created human in his image,

in the image of God he created him ;
male and female he created them .

28 And God blessed them ,

"Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the land,
and subdue it;
and rule

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

108 of 141

over the fish of the sea
and over the birds of the sky
and over every living creature that creeps on

the land ."

Genesis 1-2:3. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth
(2020).

Observations
The literary symmetries invite the reader to compare the corresponding sections. The “image of God”
statements are immediately followed by sections that unpack the meaning and significance of the divine
image.
1. “And Let Them Rule Over …”
In Hebrew grammar and syntax, when you have a verb of command or invitation (called a “jussive”) followed
by a clause that also has a jussive (“and let them rule …”), it is meant to be understood as a purpose
statement: “Let us make human in our image … in order that they may rule …”
For this point, see Thomas Lambdin’s book Introduction to Biblical Hebrew (1971 edition), section 107c.
2. “Male and Female” = “In His Image”
Notice in Genesis 1:27 how the three-line poem has three key elements in each line.

Parallelism of Genesis 1:27

Line 1

God created

human

in his image

Line 2

He created

him

in the image of God

Line 3

He created

them

male and female

Parallelism of Genesis 1:27. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth (2019).

This poetic parallelism makes clear that the divine image is constituted in some crucial way by the duality of
gender. Somehow God is imaged in a special way through the unity of humanity as one species that consists
of two distinct others. Humanity is one and more than one at the same time, and this offers an important
image of God’s divine identity.
3. The Preposition “In”
The preposition “in” (Heb. be-/-‫ )ב‬attached to “his image” means “in the place of” or “instead of” (called beth
pretii, see Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar, sec. 102p). Therefore, this verse can be read as “God created human in
the place of his image/as his image.”

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

109 of 141

Reflection Question
What does it say about God that he creates humans in his image to rule with him?

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

110 of 141

