Session 3: Heaven and Earth Come Together in Jesus

Key Takeaways
The New Testament’s view of the universe is really similar to that of the Hebrew Bible.
Jesus’ message was that he was joining Heaven, the sphere of God’s reign, and Earth, the space of
humanity, within himself.
Humans are to partner with Jesus in bringing Heaven to Earth by contributing to human flourishing.

New Testament Views of Heaven and Earth
The Gospel of Matthew
The following are examples of biblical cosmology in the Gospel of Matthew.
Matthew 4:8: “a high mountain” from which Jesus can see all the kingdoms of the Earth
Matthew 4:17: Kingdom of Heaven has come near
Matthew 6:9-10: The Lord’s prayer, God’s Kingdom/will here on Earth as in Heaven
Matthew 11:23: Capernaum not exalted up to Heaven but going down to Sheol/Hades
Matthew 12:39-40: Sign of Jonah, belly of whale // “heart of the Earth”
Matthew 12:42: Queen of the South comes “from the ends of the Earth”
Matthew 28:16-20: On a mountain, the risen Jesus says, “All authority in Heaven and on Earth belongs to
me”

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

11 of 141

The Overlapping of Heaven and Earth. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven
and Earth (2019).

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

12 of 141

Jesus Is the Overlap Between Heaven and Earth. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Heaven and Earth (2019).

The Letters of Paul
The following are examples of biblical cosmology in the letters of Paul.
Philippians 2:9-10: The exalted Jesus was raised high so every knee will bow “in Heaven, on Earth, and
under the Earth.”
Ephesians: 1:19-22: Jesus’ resurrection exalted him to “sit at his right hand in the heavenly places.”
Ephesians 2:1-7: We have been raised from the dead and “raised up and seated with him in the heavenly
places.”
2 Corinthians 12:1-4: Paul talks about “a guy I know” (himself) who had a vision and apocalypse where he
ascended up to the “third Heaven.”

The Book of Revelation
The following are examples of biblical cosmology in the the book of Revelation.
Revelation 21:1-3: A new Heaven and Earth, a city descending from Heaven (presumably the new one
coming to a new Earth), but it’s called a tabernacle
Revelation 21:10: The city coming down again, described as a temple-Jerusalem-garden-throne of God
What is going on in these passages? Over time, it became clear that the authors of the Hebrew Bible, Jesus,
and the apostles imagined a universe that is very different from our modern conception of the universe.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

13 of 141

It is crucial to understand the Bible on its own terms, which may require unlearning and relearning the biblical
conception of the cosmos, that is, Heaven and Earth.

The Final Overlapping of Heaven and Earth. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Heaven and Earth (2019).

Reflection Question
The New Testament’s view of the universe is really similar to that of the Hebrew Bible. Why does this matter
when it comes to understanding Jesus and his message?

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

14 of 141

