Session 30: God Rests on the Seventh Day

Key Takeaways
“Seven” (sheva) and “complete/full” (sava) are spelled with the same Hebrew consonants. Seven
communicates a sense of fullness or completeness.
There are two words used to describe God’s Sabbath rest on the seventh day of creation: shabbat (Gen.
2:2-3) and nuakh (Exod. 20:11). Shabbat means rest in the sense of stopping all work. Nuakh means rest
in the sense of settling and taking up residence.
When God completes his work and rests on the seventh day of creation, the authors are saying that
God’s glorious presence fills the Earth. But he also takes up residence in creation with humanity—
Heaven and Earth are truly united in this moment.

Time in Genesis 1 (Eschatology)
The most self-evident design feature of Genesis 1 is its seven-day sequence. The number seven is an
organizing principle for the entire chapter from beginning to end.
The opening line of Genesis 1 has seven words, and the central word, untranslated in English, is two Hebrew
letters, the first and last letters of the Hebrew alphabet.

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

‫הארץ‬

‫את‬

‫השמים‬

‫א ת‬

‫אלהים‬

‫ברא‬

‫בראשית‬

the land

and

the skies

God

he created

In-thebeginning

‫ = א‬aleph / ‫ = ת‬tav
Time in Genesis 1 (Eschatology). Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth
(2019).

Genesis 1:1 shows us that the structural design of sentences is meaningful and can convey deeper layers of
significance. Here, the number seven is introduced as significant alongside the structural importance of the
central word.
This same design structure is at work on the macro-level in Genesis 1: The first, middle, and final days all focus
on the theme of time in a coordinated way.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

127 of 141

See how the symmetrical emphasis on time in Genesis 1 and the literary design of day four (1:14-19) connect in
the table below [adapted from Morales, Michael (2015). Who Shall Ascend the Mountain of the Lord? 44.]. The
narrative provides a foundation for all of Israel’s ritual calendar.

A:

B:

Time

Inhabitants

Day 1

Day 2

Light and dark

Waters, sky dome

Day and night

C:

B':

A':

Inhabitants

Time

Day 4

Day 5

Day 7

Sun and moon

Fish, birds

Sabbath day

Time +
Inhabitants

Day and night

Jubilee cycle

Daily Shema

Day 3

Annual festivals

Day 6

Sabbath ritual

prayer

Dry land, plants

Annual feast days

Dry land, plants

Jubilee year

Daily sacrifices in

and sacrifices

morning and

Leviticus 23

Leviticus 25-26

evening
Exodus 29:38-46

Design Emphasis on Time in Genesis 1. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and
Earth (2019).

A

1:14a And God said, "Let the lights be in the skies for dividing between the

day

and between the

night ,
1:14b and let them be for signs and for festival times and for days and years.

B

B

A

1:15 And let them be for lights in the dome of the skies, to give light upon the land."

C

1:16a And God made the two great lamps, the great light for ruling over the day

C'

1:16b and the little lamp for ruling over the night and also the stars.

1:17 And he set them in the dome of the skies, to give light upon the land,

1:18a and rule over the day and over the night
1:18b and to divide between the light and between the darkness.

Design of Day Four. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth (2019).

This design highlights the structural significance of divinely-ordered time in Genesis 1. God provides the
essential order (day one) and then delegates the maintenance of that order to others (day four), which is
mirrored by the sacred calendar of Israel. All of this looks forward to and leads up to the Sabbath (day seven).

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

128 of 141

Other Patterns of Seven in Genesis 1
In his book A Commentary on the Book of Genesis, biblical scholar Umberto Cassuto draws attention to
patterns of seven in the first movement of Genesis.
There are seven words in Genesis 1:1 and fourteen words in Genesis 1:2.
There are seven paragraphs in Genesis 1:1-2:3 marked by “evening and morning.”
The concluding seventh paragraph in Genesis 2:1-3 begins three lines which have seven words each
(2:2-3a).

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

and-he-

God

one-the-

the-

his-work

which

he-

day

seventh

from-all

finished

and-he-

on the

the-

ceased

day

seventh

and-he-

God

the

made

his-work

which

hemade

day

blessed

the-

and-he-

seventh

sanctified

it

Patterns of Seven in Genesis 1. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth
(2019).

Each of the key words in Genesis 1:1 are repeated by multiples of seven in the opening movement of Genesis.
“God” = 35x (7x5) in Genesis 1:1-2:3
“Land” = 21x (7x3) in Genesis 1:1-2:3
“Skies” and “dome” = 21x (7x3) in Genesis 1:2-2:3
Key words that are repeated seven times:
"Light" (5x) and "day" (2x) = seven times on day one
“Light” on day four
“Living creature” (‫ )חיה‬on days five and six
“God saw that it was good”
God speaks 10 times in Genesis 1:1-2:3.
Seven of those times are divine creative commands to the creation itself: “Let there be”
Three of those times are divine initiatives toward humanity: “Let us make ‘adam,” “be fruitful and
multiply,” “behold I have given to you”
“To suppose that all these appearances of the number seven are mere coincidence is not possible. This
numerical symmetry is, as it were, the golden thread that binds together all the parts of the section.”

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

129 of 141

Cassuto, Umberto (1961). A Commentary on the Book of Genesis: Part I, From Adam to Noah (Genesis 1-6).
Magnes Press. 93-94.

Why the Number Seven?
Seven was a symbolic number in Israelite culture and literature. It communicated a sense of fullness or
completeness (‫“ שבע‬seven” is spelled with the same consonants as the word ‫שבע‬, meaning “complete/full”).
This makes sense of the pervasive appearance of seven patterns in the Bible.
The Hebrew word “seven” is a homonym with the Hebrew words for “complete/full.”
“Seven” = Hebrew sheva’ / ‫שבע‬
“Complete, full” = Hebrew sava’ / ‫שבע‬
“Oath, promise” = Hebrew savua’ / ‫שבע‬
The origin of seven symbolizing completeness possibly originates in the lunar calendar of moon cycles. The
biblical Hebrew word for “month” is the same as “new moon” (‫)חדש‬, a period of time made up of 29.5
days/month, consisting of four 7.3-day cycles, making a complete cycle of time. For more on this see Maurice
H. Farbridge’s book The Biblical and Semitic Symbolism Of Numbers (Farbridge, 2010).
However, the Israelite Sabbath cycle is independent of the moon cycle, and Sabbaths do not coincide with
the new moon. Rather, the seven-day cycle in Genesis 1 is portrayed as the ideal complete time sequence of
creation. It stands outside of any natural cycle of time (sun, moon, stars).

Why Does God Rest on the Seventh Day?
God’s rest involves a matrix of ideas connected with temples. God is taking up his rest within a sacred space
by filling it with his divine presence.

Two Key “Rest” Words Associated with Sabbath, Shabat and Nuakh
When God rests on the seventh day, the text uses the word shabbat, which means “to stop.”
Genesis 2:1-2 NASB*
1

Thus the heavens and the earth were completed, and all their hosts.

2

On the seventh day God completed

his work which he had done, and he rested (Heb. shabbat) on the seventh day from all his work which he
had done
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Shabat = “to cease from.” God ceases from his work because “it is finished” (Gen. 2:1). Compare Joshua
5:12, “the manna ceased (shabbat) on that day.“

By the time we get to Exodus, this same rest is associated with another word, nuakh, which means “to take up
residence.”
Exodus 20:11 NASB*

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

130 of 141

For in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all that is in them, and rested (Heb.
nuakh) on the seventh day, therefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath (Heb. shabbat) day and made it holy.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Both of these, shabbat and nuakh, become closely associated words in the Hebrew Bible used to evoke an
image of God’s presence filling his temple and bringing peace.
God’s rest involves a matrix of ideas connected with temples. God is taking up his rest within a sacred space
by filling it with his divine presence.
Exodus 10:14 NASB*
The locusts came up over the land of Egypt and rested in all the land.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Deuteronomy 12:10 ESV*
When you cross the Jordan and live in the land which the LORD your God is giving you to inherit, and he
gives you rest from all your enemies around you so that you live in security ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

2 Samuel 7:1 Instructor's Translation
Now when King David dwelt in his house, for Yahweh had provided rest from his enemies ...
In conclusion, when God or people nuakh, it always involves settling into a place that is safe, secure, and
stable.
Creation is depicted as the cosmic prototype in Genesis 1. All later temples are symbolic miniatures of this
prototype. In each later biblical temple, God’s presence fills the sacred space on the seventh day.

Tabernacle

Creation and

Tabernacle Designs

Sabbath

and Sabbath

Creation’s

Tabernacle Instructions

Completion of the

Completion

(Exod. 25-31)

Tabernacle

(Gen. 1:31-2:3)

Completion and
Sabbath

Jerusalem Temple
Completion

1 Kings 6-8

(Exod. 39-40)

Seven days open

Seven speeches open

Seven acts of

Seven petitions of

with divine

with divine command:

obedience to the

Solomon upon the

command: “And God

“And Yahweh spoke to

divine command

completion of the

said …”

Moses …”

complete tabernacle:

temple: “Blessed be

Day 1 — Gen. 1:5

Speech 1 — Exod. 25:1

“And Moses did … just

Yahweh who spoke to

Day 2 — Gen. 1:8

Speech 2 — Exod. 30:11

as Yahweh

my father David.”

Cosmic Prototype of Creation and The Tabernacle and Temple as Symbolic Miniatures. Created by Tim
Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth (2019).

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

131 of 141

Tabernacle

Creation and

Tabernacle Designs

Sabbath

and Sabbath

Day 3 — Gen. 1:13

Speech 3 — Exod. 30:17

commanded Moses.”

Petition 1 — 1 Kgs. 8:31-

Day 4 — Gen. 1:19

Speech 4 — Exod.

Act 1 — Exod. 40:19

32

Day 5 — Gen. 1:23

30:22

Act 2 — Exod. 40:21

Petition 2 — 1 Kgs. 8:33-

Day 6 — Gen. 1:31

Speech 5 — Exod.

Act 3 — Exod. 40:23

34

Day 7 — Gen. 2:1-3

30:34

Act 4 — Exod. 40:25

Petition 3 — 1 Kgs. 8:35-

Sabbath

Speech 6 — Exod. 31:1

Act 5 — Exod. 40:27

37a

Speech 7 — Exod. 31:12

Act 6 — Exod. 40:29

Petition 4 — 1 Kgs. 8:37b-

Sabbath

Act 7 — Exod. 40:32-35

40

Divine rest

Petition 5 — 1 Kgs. 8:41-

Completion and
Sabbath

Jerusalem Temple
Completion

43
Petition 6 — 1 Kgs. 8:4445
Petition 7 — 1 Kgs. 8:4653
Seven-day feasts

Seventh day

Seventh speech

Seventh act of

Solomon observes two

culminates in

emphasizes the “sign of

obedience “completes”

seven-day feasts to

Sabbath (Gen. 2:1-3)

Sabbath” (Exod. 31:12-

the tabernacle

dedicate the temple (1

17)

Kgs. 8:65)

Priesthood installed
after a seven-day
ordination (Exod. 28-29)

“And God saw all

“And Moses saw all the

“Then the king faced

that he had done,

work they had done,

about and blessed all the

and behold, it was

and behold, just as

assembly of Israel, while

very good. And there

Yahweh commanded,

all the assembly of Israel

was evening and

so they did, and Moses

was standing.” (1 Kgs.

morning, the sixth

blessed them.” (Exod.

8:14)

day.” (Gen. 1:31)

39:43)

“And God blessed
the seventh day.”
(Gen 2:3)

“and the skies and

“and it came about

“and Moses completed

“and Solomon built the

the land were

when he completed (

(‫ )כלה‬the work (‫”)מלאכה‬

temple and he finished (

completed (‫”)כלה‬

‫ )כלה‬speaking to Moses

(Exod. 40:33)

‫ )כלה‬it” (1 Kgs. 6:14)

(Gen. 2:1)

Cosmic Prototype of Creation and The Tabernacle and Temple as Symbolic Miniatures. Created by Tim
Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth (2019).

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

132 of 141

Creation and

Tabernacle Designs

Sabbath

and Sabbath

Tabernacle
Completion and
Sabbath

Jerusalem Temple
Completion

on Mount Sinai” (Exod.
31:18)

“and God rested

“and the cloud covered

“and the cloud filled the

(‫ )שבת‬on the seventh

the tent of meeting,

house of Yahweh” (1 Kgs.

day …”

and the glory of

8:10-11)

Yahweh filled the tent”
(Exod. 40:34)

“… from all his work (

“you shall keep the

Aaron and his sons are

“In the eleventh year, in

‫ … )מלאכה‬and God
blessed (‫ )ברך‬the

Sabbath for it is holy (

brought before the

the … eighth month, the

tent for seven days in

temple was finished

seventh day and

‫ )קדש‬for you … Six days
let the work (‫ )מלאכה‬be

the ordination

throughout all its parts

made it holy (‫”)קדש‬

done, and on the

ceremony (Lev. 8-9,

and according to all its

(Gen. 2:2-3)

seventh day it is a

see 8:35)

plans. So he was seven

Sabbath of Sabbath.”

years in building it. (1

(Exod. 31:14-15)

Kgs. 6:38)
“And the work (‫ )מלאכה‬of
the pillars was finished.”
(1 Kgs. 7:22)
“Thus all the work (

‫ )מלאכה‬that King
Solomon performed in
the house of the Lord
was finished.” (1 Kgs.
7:51)

Temptation and fall

Temptation and fall

Temptation and fall

Temptation and fall

narrative: Genesis 3

narrative: Exodus 32

narrative: Leviticus 10

narrative: 1 Kings 9:1-9
and 11:1-3

Cosmic Prototype of Creation and The Tabernacle and Temple as Symbolic Miniatures. Created by Tim
Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Heaven and Earth (2019).

In a Similar Way, the Temple in Israel Was Spoken of as the Place of
God's Rest
Psalm 132:7-8, 13-14 NASB*

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

133 of 141

7

Let us go into his dwelling place/tent (Heb. mishkan / ‫;)משכן‬

let us worship at his footstool.
8

Arise, O LORD, to your resting place (Heb. menukhah / ‫)מנוחה‬,

you and the ark of your strength.
13

For the LORD has chosen Zion;

he has desired it for his habitation.
14

“This is my resting place (Heb. menukhah / ‫ )מנוחה‬forever;

here I will sit enthroned, for I have desired it.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Exodus 15:17-18 NASB*
17 “You will bring them and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance,
the place, O LORD, which you have made for your dwelling (Heb. le-shibteka / shabbat / ‫)לשבתך‬,
the sanctuary, O LORD, which your hands have established.
18

The LORD shall reign forever and ever.”

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

“The role of the temple in ancient Israel was not only a place where people gathered for worship. It is first
and foremost a place for the deity—sacred space. It is God’s home, but more importantly, his headquarters
—the control room. When the deity rests in his temple, it means that he is taking command, that he is
mounting his throne to assume his rightful place and his proper role. ... So, what did God do on the eighth
day? In this view, on the eighth day, and every day since then, he is in the control room from where he runs
the cosmos that he set up. This is the ongoing work of creation. If one thinks of Genesis 1 as an account of
material origins, God’s creating is an action in the past that is now over and done with. God made the
physical universe and now the cosmos exists. But viewing Genesis 1 as an ancient account of the cosmos’
functional origins offers a more faithful account to the scriptural depiction of God’s creational 'rest' as
ongoing.”
Walton, John H. (2015). The Lost World of Adam and Eve: Genesis 2–3 and the Human Origins Debate. IVP
Academic. 75, 77.
“Humanity’s elevation, made in the image of God, is designed for the exaltation of the Sabbath day. The
Sabbath thus becomes the day for humanity to enjoy its privileged status of being created as God’s image.
The Sabbath is the symbolic time for humanity’s climactic union with and representation of its Creator. ...
Just as the divine work began with a workman’s week as an archetype of the human week, now humanity
can live in the image of God. The Sabbath and the image of God are linked together and interdependent
themes.”
Morales, Michael (2015). Who Shall Ascend the Mountain of the Lord?: A Biblical Theology of the Book of
Leviticus. IVP Academic. 48.

Why Does God Bless the Seventh Day?
God’s blessing upon the creatures and humans on days five and six is directly tied to being fruitful and
multiplying and filling the land.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

134 of 141

By analogy, the blessing on the Sabbath would also involve a kind of fruitfulness, multiplying, and filling that
is appropriate to a period of time. The idea is that the Sabbath would become many as it is observed and
experienced by others.
“Set apart from all other days, the blessing of the seventh day establishes the seventh part of created time
as a day when God grants his presence in the created world. It is then his presence that provides the
blessing and the sanctification. The seventh day is blessed and established as the part of time that assures
fruitfulness, future-orientation, continuity, and permanence for every aspect of life within the dimension of
time. The seventh day is blessed by God’s presence for the sake of the created world, for all nature, and for
all living beings.”
Frey, Mathilde (2011). The Sabbath in the Pentateuch: an Exegetical and Theological Study. Andrews
University Digital Commons. 38.

The Seventh Day That Has No End
The seven days portray God working to bring order and life out of darkness and chaos. This divine work
culminates in the delegation of human images who rule the fruitful land on God’s behalf (day six). Creation is
“completed” (Gen. 2:1) only after God delivers creation from the darkness and chaos waters and appoints a
human image to rule. After he completes creation, God can rest/cease from his work.
“Unlike the previous days, the seventh day is simply announced. There is no mention of evening or
morning, no mention of a beginning or ending. The suggestion is that the primordial seventh day exists in
perpetuity, a sacred day that cannot be abrogated by the limitations common to the rest of the created
order.”
Balentine, Samuel (1999). The Torah’s Vision of Worship. Fortress Press. 93.
“The seventh-day account does not end with the expected formula, 'there was evening and morning,' that
concluded days one through six. Breaking the pattern in this way emphasizes the uniqueness of the
seventh day and opens the door to an eschatological interpretation. Literarily, the sun has not yet set on
God’s Sabbath.”
Lowry, Richard (2000). Sabbath and Jubilee. Chalice Press. 90.
“The Sabbath is that point in time where God and man meet. On the seventh day of creation, God joined
himself and his eternal presence to his temporal creation, to the world of man. On the Sabbath day, man
not only recalls but participates in an act of cosmic creation ... he experiences the original structuring of
time within the microcosm of his own life. ... The observance of the Sabbath links humanity to a divinely
ordained future, as well as a divinely created past. Sabbath observance has cosmic implications ... a
foretaste of an eschatological future ... a prefiguration of the final phase of the divine/human reconciliation.
In pointing back to the beginning, the Sabbath also points to what is yet to be, to the final destiny to which
all creation is moving.”
Och, Bernard (1995). “Creation and Redemption: Towards a Theology of Creation.” Judaism: A Quarterly
Journal of Jewish Life and Thought. Volume 44 (No. 2). 240.

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

135 of 141

“With regard to the lack of the final formula, 'there was evening and there was morning,' commentators
have argued that the seventh day is not meant to be understood as a literal day. This argumentation then
has led to an eschatological interpretation of the seventh day. However, as part of the first creation
account, the seventh day is the last of the seven sections, and the formula 'there was evening and there
was morning' in the account of the weekdays may be taken not only as a closing formula but also as a
literary feature to anticipate what comes next within the series of sections in the creation account, that is
the next day of the creation week. Functioning as a transition from one day to another the closing formula
is a feature that moves the text forward throughout the six weekdays with the intention to arrive at the
seventh day. Once it arrives at the last section, the text highlights the identification of the seventh day by
stating it three times and then has no more need for the formula because there is no eighth section
following for an eighth day. Creation has come to an end, for the seventh day has arrived.”
Frey, Mathilde (2011). The Sabbath in the Pentateuch: an Exegetical and Theological Study. Andrews
University Digital Commons. 38.

Israel’s Sacred Calendar in Leviticus 23
In Leviticus, the Sabbath ideal is multiplied by seven. Leviticus 23 lists seven meeting/convocation days for
Israel’s holy worship. Every one (except firstfruits) is a multiple of seven (in days or the month) or a duration of
seven and represents a moment of new creation.

Holy Day

Date

Duration

Activity

Ritual Story

1

7th day

1 day

No work

Creation and rest

Passover and

1/14

1 day + 7

No work on 1st

Exodus liberation into

Unleavened Bread

1/15-21

days

and 7th day

the promised land

Firstfruits

Day after 7th

1 day

—

Celebrating the gift

Sabbath

First Half of the Year

2

3

day

4

Weeks/Pentecost

7 x 7 + 1 days

of food

1 day

No work

after Sabbath

Celebrating the gift
of food

Second Half of the Year

5

Trumpets

7th month /
1st day

1 day

No work

Marking the 7th
month

Israel’s Sacred Calendar in Leviticus Chapter 23. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Heaven and Earth (2019).

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

136 of 141

Holy Day

Date

Duration

Activity

Ritual Story

6

7th month /

1 day

No work

Removing sin and

Day of Atonement

10th day

7

Tabernacles

7th month

death from the camp

7 days

7/15-7/21

No work on 1st

Provision in the midst

and 7th day

of the wilderness

Israel’s Sacred Calendar in Leviticus Chapter 23. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Heaven and Earth (2019).

The principle of the Sabbath (a burst of Eden rest into ordinary time) is here multiplied by seven. All these
holy days participate and develop some aspect of meaning of the original Sabbath.
Passover and Unleavened Bread celebrate redemption from death (new creation) and commitment to
simplicity and trust in God’s power to provide food in the wilderness.
Firstfruits and Weeks celebrate the gift of produce from the land.
Trumpets announces the sabbatical (seventh) month.
Day of Atonement celebrates God’s renewal of the holiness of his Eden presence among his
compromised people.
Tabernacles celebrates provision for God’s people on their way to the promised land/Eden. They are to
live in God’s “tent” for a Sabbath cycle. Leviticus 23:40 says, “And you will take the fruit of the beautiful
tree, the branches of a palm, and branches of a tree of leaf and of poplar trees by a river, and you shall
rejoice before Yahweh for seven days.” This is a mini-Eden tent made of the fruit of a beautiful tree for a
Sabbath cycle (Gen. 1-2)!

Reflection Question
What is the significance of God resting on the seventh day of creation?

Class Notes: Heaven and Earth

137 of 141

