Session 8: Adultery and Lust

Key Takeaways
Jesus explains that adultery and lust come from a common source. Just because we don’t commit
adultery doesn’t mean we are free from the root problem.
Jesus directly confronts the public social dynamic of men staring at women in order to stir up desire,
emphasizing that in his Kingdom, women are to be safe.
The eye and the hand are used together as a common Hebrew Bible idiom to represent both our focus
and what we do in response to our ingrained patterns of thinking.
By identifying the problem as one of the heart, Jesus makes it clear that he’s not commanding selfmutilation when he speaks of tearing out your eye or cutting off your hand. Instead, he’s using an
arresting image to make a clear point: At all costs, don’t let a habit of the mind or body prevent you
from doing what is clearly best for yourself and others.

Case Study 2: Adultery & Lust

a 27 You have heard that it was said,
b “You shall not commit adultery ”;

a' 28 and I say to you that
b' everyone who goes on looking at a woman in order to cultivate lust for her,

he has already committed adultery with her in his heart .

a 29 If your right eye causes your downfall ,
b tear it out and throw it from you;

a' for it is better for you to lose one of your body-parts ,
b' than for your whole body to be thrown into gehenna .

a 30 If your right hand causes your downfall ,
b cut it off and throw it from you;

a' for it is better for you to lose one of your body-parts ,
b' than for your whole body to go off into gehenna .

Class Notes: Messianic Torah

93 of 245

Matthew 5:27-30. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: The Messianic
Torah (2024).
Jesus quotes the seventh of the Ten Commandments. He does not offer an antithesis (“but I say adultery is
fine”), but neither does he simply comment on adultery as such. He delves deeper, revealing the subterranean
character issues at work “in the heart.” Jesus’ language has several nuances that are often missed on a first
reading.
“goes on looking” (ὁ βλέπων γυναῖκα, present tense participle): The action is on-going, sustained, and
prolonged. He is addressing “the stare,” where one’s purpose is to use another for personal pleasure
and satisfaction.
“in order to lust after her” (πρὸς τὸ ἐπιθυμῆσαι αὐτὴν, infinitive purpose clause)
Jesus is not referring to the casual look, where someone notices a sexually attractive person. He is
referring to the stare that is intentionally prolonged in order to form an image in one’s mind and
create a fantasy.
This is often translated as an adverb, “lustfully” (NIV), “with lust” (NASB, NRSV). This is not helpful,
as it can refer to the unintentional desires that are activated. Jesus uses an expression of purpose,
“with intent to lust” (ESV) or “in order to lust” (KJV). This emphasis should be preserved in
translation if we want to understand him.
In parallel with the previous teaching about how murder begins with angry contempt, so also adultery begins
with the lust-filled stare. Jesus locates adultery at the level of distorted desire, and the choice to continue
fueling that desire through the stare. The stare denigrates the dignity and value of the other, treating them as
a sub-human, passive object that exists for my pleasure and purposes. It is the ultimate form of
dehumanization.
"We should not make the bowstring too taut here, as if anyone who is tempted to look with lust is eternally
damned for it. … ‘I cannot keep a bird from flying over my head. But I can certainly keep it from nesting in
my hair or from biting my nose off.'"
Luther, Martin (2017). Commentary on the Sermon on the Mount. Lexham Press.

The Right Eye / Right Hand
“If your right hand/eye … ”: Because the majority of people are right-handed, it became a common saying,
assuming that the right hand (or whichever is used most) is the most useful. The point is to highlight the
extreme nature of the action. Even what is most useful is to be sacrificed when one’s life is at stake.
Jesus believes that distorted sexual desire is a matter of serious consequence, which is why he uses the
phrase “cause to stumble” (Greek: skandalizomai). The kind of “fall” Jesus has in mind is not a minor slip, but a
crash to the ground.
He’s talking about sexual desire taking over your life and shipwrecking your ability to make wise choices. Sin is
the inward turn and the destruction of outward living and healthy relationships.
Jesus is not denigrating sex or sexual desire. There’s an entire book of his Bible dedicated to the celebration of
love and sexual desire (Song of Songs). What Jesus addresses here is distorted desire that is aimed at

Class Notes: Messianic Torah

94 of 245

someone you don’t love or have any commitment to. Sexual desire apart from covenantal commitment allows
people to use each other.
Jesus is not suppressing sexuality, but telling us that some things matter more than gratifying our sexual
desires, like the dignity of people who are made as the image of God.

Self-Mutilation
Jesus clearly isn’t commanding self-mutilation; rather, he’s using an arresting image to make a clear point: At
all costs, don’t let a habit of the mind and body prevent you from doing what is clearly best for yourself and
others.
The command is not to be taken literally, as if Jesus thinks that amputation can curb sexual passion. Not to
mention the fact that he doesn’t mention the body part that, for men, would be the first thing to amputate in
order to solve the problem. The body is not the problem. That is way too simplistic. The problem is not with
the body itself, but “in the heart,” as he said in Matthew 5:28.
Jesus’ point is to take decisive action against that habit, thing, or person that, though pleasurable and
perhaps seemingly indispensable for living, is in fact ruining our lives (see Bruner). Life in the Kingdom will
require some degree of loss, of denial, of withdrawing from things that seem fine or even good.
Notice that Jesus focuses on men. Not that women aren’t included, but Jesus puts extra emphasis on this
teaching aimed at men. Jesus wants to emphasize that in his Kingdom, women are to be safe.

Reflection Question
What are the implications of Jesus’ teaching to tear out your eye or cut off your hand if they cause you to
stumble?

Class Notes: Messianic Torah

95 of 245

