Session 2: How Jesus and the Apostles Read Their
Bibles

Key Takeaways
Jesus and his first followers portray the Hebrew Bible as a unified collection of wisdom literature that
tells a story about a future anointed one who will rescue humanity.
The Hebrew Bible is about an anointed representative who enters into suffering and death, goes
through death and out the other side, and offers new life for humanity.
By recovering a way of reading these texts that matches the contours of their design intentions, we will
learn to read the Hebrew Bible as Jesus did.

Jesus and the TaNaK
Jesus and his first followers consistently portray the Hebrew Bible as a unified collection of wisdom literature
that tells a forward-pointing story.
Luke 24:25-27 NIV*
25

[Jesus] said to [the disciples], “How foolish you are, and how slow to believe all that the prophets have

spoken!

26

Did not the Messiah have to suffer these things and then enter his glory?”

27

And beginning with

Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Luke 24:44-47 NASB*
44

Now he said to them, “These are my words which I spoke to you while I was still with you, that all things

which are written about me in the Torah of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled.”
Then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures,

46

45

and he said to them, “Thus it is written, that

the Messiah would suffer and rise again from the dead the third day,

47

and that repentance for forgiveness

of sins would be proclaimed in his name to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

2 Timothy 3:14-17 Instructor’s Translation
14

You [Timothy], continue in the things you have learned and become convinced of, knowing from whom

you have learned,

15

how from childhood you have known the sacred scriptures which are able to give you

wisdom that leads to salvation through faith, which is in Messiah Jesus.

16

All Scripture is God-breathed and

profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training in doing what is right,

17

so that God’s people

can be proficient, equipped for doing good.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

6 of 109

How did Jesus and his followers reach this conclusion? They did not invent this way of reading the Hebrew
Bible. Rather, they inherited from their Jewish tradition a set of convictions about the origin, nature, and
meaning of these texts. They also grew up in communities that modeled how to read and make sense of the
Hebrew Bible.
Notice that Jesus refers to the Hebrew Bible as a two-part (“Torah ... and Prophets”) or three-part (“Torah ...
Prophets ... Psalms”) collection. Jesus is not alone in this. He is expressing the most common way the Bible
was referred to in Jewish culture during this period.

The Apostles and the TaNaK
Also, when we look at how Jesus and the apostles actually interpret and appeal to the Hebrew Bible, they see
it as a repository of patterns or “types” (τύπος) in Greek.
Romans 5:14 NASB*
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those who had not sinned in the likeness of
the offense of Adam, who is a type/pattern of him who was to come.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

1 Corinthians 10:1-11 NASB*
1

For I do not want you to be unaware, brethren, that our fathers were all under the cloud and all passed

through the sea;
spiritual food;

4

2

and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

3

and all ate the same

and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they were drinking from a spiritual rock which

followed them; and the rock was Christ. ...

11

Now these things happened to them as a type/pattern, and

they were written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the ages have come.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

1 Peter 3:20-21 NASB*
20

who once were disobedient, when the patience of God kept waiting in the days of Noah, during the

construction of the ark, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were brought safely through the water.

21

A

matching type/pattern to that, baptism now saves you—not the removal of dirt from the flesh, but an
appeal to God for a good conscience—through the resurrection of Jesus Christ ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Reading Like Jesus and the Apostles
These passages help us set an agenda for this class.
We will examine the writing, collection, and composition of the Hebrew Bible.
We will recover a way of reading these texts that matches the contours of their design intentions.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

7 of 109

Reflection Question
Summarize how you would express what Jesus and the apostles thought the Hebrew Bible was all about. And
what do you make of this idea? Is it similar or different from how you typically view the Hebrew Bible?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

8 of 109

