Session 16: How Hebrew Parallelism Works

Key Takeaways
Biblical authors often use parallelism in their poetry, which causes the readers to place two or more
things in comparison with each other to show their relation.
At its root, parallelism is a form of comparison and analogy. It assumes that to truly understand and
experience a thing, you need to grasp not only that thing but also another thing that is both similar and
distinct at the same time.
Parallelism employs comparison techniques such as analogy, complement, contrast, and sequence—
each requiring and aiding the reader to discover the uniqueness and meaning behind the poetic lines.

Poetic Conventions in Ancient Israel
The ancient Israelite poetry preserved for us in the Bible doesn’t fit any kind of master system like meter
(though some think so). However, the Israelites were aware of a certain kind of speech that was poetic, dense,
and distinct from normal speech. They even have vocabulary for it.
Song (Heb. shir / shirah): “Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song …” (Exod. 15:1)
Psalm (Heb. mizmor): “A mizmor of David” (Psalm 3; many psalms have these headings)
Lament (Heb. qinah): “David lamented this qinah over Saul and Jonathan” (2 Sam. 1:17)
These compositions show a unique, cultural form of Hebrew poetry that is not a formal system but a series of
characteristics.
“The Verse of the Hebrew Bible is strange
The meter of Psalms and Proverbs perplexes
It is not a matter of number,
No counting of beats or syllables
Its song is a music of matching,
Its rhythm a kind of paralleling
One line makes an assertion;
The other part expresses in other words
Sometimes a third part will vary yet again.”
Hollander, John (2001). Rhyme’s Reason, A Guide to English Verse. Yale University Press. 26.

Rhythm and Free Verse

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

43 of 109

Hebrew poetry is shaped into a line-rhythm or verse. It is not metrical (based on syllable counts), but a form of
free verse composed of poetic lines.
Verse = a description of poetic form: “A succession of words arranged according to natural or artificially
created rules, forming a complete line; a verse is one of the lines of a poem or a piece of versification”
(Oxford English Dictionary).
Line = The smallest segment of poetry, consisting of a dense, complete statement. People have
proposed many words to describe the poetic line (stich, colon, verse, membrum), but “line” is the most
simple and common English word.
“The poetry of the Hebrew Bible is a natural, free, and rhythmic system. The poems have no consistent
metrical scheme, and so have a freedom from predetermined arrangments. But their language is organized
so as to create impressions and fulfill the functions of poetic rhythm. Free verse is totally free, it is verse,
but it’s free to play with the verse rhythm in a variety of ways, making use of all manner of linguistic artistry.”
Dobbs-Allsopp, F.W. (2015). On Biblical Poetry. Oxford University Press. 120-121.
The line in Hebrew poetry is most often (1) a complete sentence or subordinate clause (2) consisting of three
to five words (3) marked by repetition and clear end-stop signals.
For example, take a look at Psalm 51.
Psalm 51:1-4 NASB
1

Be gracious to me, O God, according to your lovingkindness;

according to the greatness of your compassion blot out my transgressions.
2

Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity

and cleanse me from my sin.
3

For I know my transgressions,

and my sin is ever before me.
4

Against you, you only, I have sinned

and done what is evil in your sight,
so that you are justified when you speak
and blameless when you judge.

Parallelism
In Lectures on the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews and his commentary on Isaiah, Robert Lowth created the first
comprehensive synthesis of features in biblical poetry (Lowth, 2004).
“There is a certain conformation of the sentences, which is chiefly observable in those passages which
frequently occur in Hebrew poetry, in which they treat one subject in many different ways, and dwell upon
the same sentiment; when they express the same thing in different words, or different things in a similar
form of words: and since this artifice of composition seldom fails to produce an agreeable and measured
cadence, we can scarcely doubt it must have imparted to their poetry an exquisite degree of beauty and
grace.”

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

44 of 109

Lowth, Robert (2004). Lectures on the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews. Kessinger Publishing.
“The correspondence of one verse or line with another, I call Parallelism. When a proposition is delivered,
and a second is subjoined to it, or drawn under it, equivalent, or contrasted with it, in sense; or similar to it
in the form of grammatical construction; these I call parallel lines; and the words or phrases answering one
to another in the corresponding line, I call parallel terms.”
Lowth, Robert (2021). Isaiah. HardPress Limited. 14.
There are many diverse types of parallel relationships. It causes us to place two or more things in comparison
with each other so that their uniqueness and meaning becomes more visible after the comparison.

Comparison/Analogy
The corresponding words and images are meant to stimulate imaginative reflection on the shared
metaphorical attributes of the paired items.
Psalm 33:6 NASB*
By the word of Yahweh the heavens were made,
and by the breath of his mouth all their host.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Isaiah 44:3 NASB
For I will pour out water on the thirsty land,
and streams on the dry ground;
I will pour out my Spirit on your offspring
and my blessing on your descendants;

Contrast
The corresponding words and images stimulate imaginative reflection on the differences highlighted by the
contrast.
Proverbs 10:11 NASB
The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life,
but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.

Complement
The second line complements the first in a general way, to complete a thought or image, or to heighten the
point in some way.
Psalm 133:1 NASB
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is
for brothers to dwell together in unity!

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

45 of 109

Habakkuk 3:2 Instructor’s Translation
LORD, I have heard the report about you; I fear.
Yahweh, renew your work in the midst of the years,
in the midst of the years make it known;
in wrath remember mercy.

Sequence
The lines are not strictly parallel but develop a short narrative sequence.
Psalm 31:1 NASB*
In you, Yahweh, I have taken refuge;
let me never be ashamed;
in your righteousness deliver me.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 31:22 Instructor’s Translation
As for me, I said in my alarm,
“I am cut off from before your eyes”;
however, you heard the voice of my petition
when I cried to you.
Proverbs 4:10 NASB
Hear, my son, and accept my sayings
and the years of your life will be many.
For a longer example, take a look at Psalm 32.
Psalm 32:1-7 NASB*
1

How fortunate the one whose transgression is forgiven,

whose sin is covered!
2

How fortunate the one to whom Yahweh does not impute iniquity,

and in whose spirit there is no deceit!
3

When I kept silent, my body wasted away,

through my groaning all day long.
4

For day and night your hand was heavy upon me;

my energy was drained,
with the heat of summer.
Selah.
5

I acknowledged my sin to you,

and my iniquity I did not hide;
I said, “I will confess my transgressions to the LORD;”
and you forgave the guilt of my sin.
6

Therefore, let everyone who is godly pray to you

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

46 of 109

in a time when you may be found;
surely in a flood of great waters
they will not reach him.
7

You are my hiding place;

you preserve me from trouble;
you surround me with songs of deliverance.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The Function of Repetition and Double-Poetic Expression
This “speaking in pairs” creates opportunities to use multiple words and images to communicate one core
idea from many angles. This type of poetic style is a wonderful way to express complex thoughts through
pairing words and images in order to communicate more through juxtaposition.
The biblical authors developed vocabulary for this technique. The Hebrew word mashal (‫ )משל‬means
“comparison, analogy, proverb.”
“The parallel lines of biblical poetry are like a pair of binoculars. Some centuries, the lenses of a field glass
were set in cylinders that could be slid in and out, but they remained in a single tube. The lookout on a ship
looked through it with one eye. Today’s field glass is a binocular: we look through two cylinders, with both
eyes, so that we have the advantage of seeing depth. Our eyes, with or without binoculars, see ‘in stereo.’
The effect results from the fact that one eye has a slightly different angle than the other, and so produces a
minimally different image. These two pictures are easily superimposed and assembled into one image
inside our brain. Biblical parallelism does something comparable: this poetic device creates two subtly
different images with two lines that are to be associated through parallel expression. It allows us an
opportunity to consider both pictures separately, and then let them sink in together ... The point of
similarity between two parallel lines is their very difference! Only those who look closely and have patience
will discover and savor the role played by dissimilarity, its surprises, and its richness of meaning.”
Fokkelman, J.P. (2001). Reading Biblical Poetry. Westminster John Knox Press. 8-79.
Psalm 62:11-12a Instructor’s Translation
11

One thing God has spoken

two things I have heard:
that power belongs to God,
12

and covenant loyalty is yours, O LORD.

Reflection Question
What would you say is the benefit of communicating with parallelism? What does it do that narrative and
discourse do not?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

47 of 109

