Session 25: Repeated Words Between Juxtaposed
Literary Units

Key Takeaways
The relationships between connected literary units can work in different ways (e.g., contrast, create a
sequence), but at the core is an analogy.
The reader is being asked to read a particular literary unit on analogy with another literary unit in order
to discover a deeper meaning.
Sometimes entire stories or scenes are designed to repeat elements of other stories. This involves not
only repeated words but parallel narrative patterns, themes, and sequences.
Sometimes the narratives to be compared are next to each other, like in Genesis 2-3 and Genesis 4. In
these narratives, we watch Human and Life set a template for redefining “good” and “bad” on their own
terms, which is replayed by the next generation.

Narrative Analogy Between Literary Units
Narrative analogy is "[w]hen two or more characters, stories, scenes, or other aspects of a biblical text bear
a significant amount of resemblance to one another, inviting further comparison between the two. The
comparison sheds new light on both aspects of the text, highlighting parallels, foreshadowing, reversal,
progression, or various other effects generated by their mutual resemblance and difference. Through this
device, to quote Robert Alter, ‘one part of the text provides oblique commentary on another.’”
Sigmon, Brian (2013). Between Eden and Egypt: Echoes of the Garden Narrative in the Story of Joseph and
His Brothers. Doctoral Dissertation, Marquette University. 46.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

85 of 109

Repeated Words Linking Different Literary Units. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

"Good" in Genesis 1-3
Genesis 1:4: “And God saw that the light was good (‫ כי טוב‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
Genesis 1:10: “And God saw that [the dry land] was good (‫ כי טוב‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
Genesis 1:12: “And God saw that [the vegetation] was good (‫ כי טוב‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
Genesis 1:18: “And God saw that [the lights] was good (‫ כי טוב‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
Genesis 1:21: “And God saw that [the sea life] was good (‫ כי טוב‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
Genesis 1:25: “And God saw that [the land life] was good (‫ כי טוב‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
Genesis 1:31: “And God saw all that he had made, and look, it was very good (‫ והנה טוב מאר‬... ‫)וירא‬.”
In terms of God’s character portrait, this repetition makes a clear claim: God is the provider and evaluator of
what is truly good. In Genesis 1, “good” defines both the ordered environments that make life possible (days
one through three) and the abundant creatures that fill the skies and the land (days four through six).
In the next literary unit, the Eden narrative (Gen. 2:4-3:24), we find this same vocabulary continued, but in new
and creative ways.
Genesis 2:9 Instructor's Translation
And Yahweh God caused the growth of every tree that was desirable to see, and good for eating, and the
tree of life was in the middle of the garden and the tree of knowing of good and bad.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

86 of 109

Genesis 1 taught us that God is the provider, evaluator, and ultimate “knower” of what is good, and we know
that he has appointed humans to rule the world on his behalf as his divine image. The humans have a choice
before them, symbolized by two trees: one represents life (which is good), and the other represents knowing
good and bad. Will the humans allow God to be the prime “knower” of what is good and not-good, or will they
take this knowledge for themselves?
Genesis 2:18 Instructor's Translation
Then Yahweh God said, “It is not good for the human to be alone …”
Once again, God is the evaluator of what is good and not good (as in Gen. 1), and once again he provides what
is good for the human: a partner without whom he cannot accomplish the image of God mission given in
Genesis 1:26-28.

Summary of "Good" in Genesis 1 and 2
Genesis 1:1-2:3 Instructor's Translation
10

“... and God saw that it was good.”

12

“... and God saw that it was good.”

18

“... and God saw that it was good.”

31

“... and God saw that it was very good.”

Genesis 2:17-18 Instructor's Translation
17

from the tree of knowing good and bad you shall not eat ...

18

... it is not good for the human to be alone;”

"Good" in Genesis 3

3:1-5

Theme: dialogue about God's command concerning the fruit
Characters: snake, woman (active)
Setting: inside the garden

Snake: “ Did God really say you may not eat from any tree in the garden?”
Woman: “From the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden God said, ‘ You shall not eat
from it …’”

3:6-7

Theme: the woman and man eat the fruit and are changed
Characters: the woman and the husband
Setting: the center of the garden

A And the woman saw that the tree was good for eating
B and desirable to the eyes and desirable for becoming wise
“Good” in Genesis 3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
(2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

87 of 109

C and she took from its fruit and she ate
C’ and she gave also to her husband and he ate .
B’ And the eyes of the two of them were opened
and they knew they were naked
A’ and they sewed the leaves of a fig tree and made garments.

3:8-13

Theme: dialogue about the eating of the fruit
Characters: Yahweh, ha’adam, the woman
Setting: inside the garden

Yahweh: “ Did you eat from the tree which I commanded you not to eat from it? ”
Woman: “The snake deceived me, and I ate from it.”

“Good” in Genesis 3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
(2019).

This story is the ultimate tragedy because the snake presents itself as one with superior knowledge about
God’s knowledge. He contradicts God’s wisdom, saying that taking the knowing of good and bad will not lead
to death but to greater wisdom.
The key phrase “and the woman saw ... good” is precisely the same phrase that was repeated seven times in
Genesis 1. Eve is portrayed as one who usurps the role and prerogative of God. Note that what God saw as
good, he "gave," whereas what the woman saw as good, she "took."

Lead Words and Analogies Between Genesis 3 and 4
The profile of Adam and Eve’s actions in Genesis 3 is a template for the next generation, who replays the
failure of their parents. The failure of Cain in Genesis 4 is deliberately set on analogy to the story of Genesis 3
and uses all of its key vocabulary.

Analogy

Genesis 2-3: Adam and Eve

Genesis 4: Cain and Abel

Human given a

2:16-17: “From any tree of the garden

4:5-7: But Yahweh did not regard Cain’s

significant choice

you may eat, but from the tree of

offering, and Cain was very angry …

about “good”

knowing good and evil you should not

Yahweh said “Why are you angry, and

eat, because the day you eat from it you

why has your face fallen? Isn’t it the

will surely die.”

case that if you do good , you will be
lifted up?”

Lead Words Through Genesis 3 and 4. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

88 of 109

Analogy

Genesis 2-3: Adam and Eve

Genesis 4: Cain and Abel

Human tempted

3:1: Now the snake was more crafty

4:7: “But if you don’t do good , sin is a

by an “animal”

than any creature of the field … and he

croucher at the door , and it’s desire is

said to the woman, “Did God really say

for you.”

not to eat from any tree in the garden?”

Human gives into

3:6: When the woman saw that the tree

4:5: And Cain was very angry

temptation with

was good for food, and desirable to the

4:8 And Cain spoke to Abel his brother

destructive

eyes, and desirable for gaining wisdom

and while they were in the field Cain

consequences

… she took

rose up against Abel his brother and
murdered him.

God shows up to

3:9: And God called out to the human,

ask a leading

and said, “ Where are you (‫”? )איכה‬

your (‫ )אי‬brother Abel?”

question

3:13: And God said to the woman,

4:10 And God said, “What have you

“What have you done?” (‫)מה עשית‬

done?” (‫)מה עשית‬

Human dodges

3:12: The human said, “The woman who

4:9: “I don’t know! Am I my brother’s

the question

you set with me, she gave to me and I

keeper?”

4:9: And God said to Cain, “ Where is

ate.”

The perpetrator is

3:14: God said to the serpent, “Because

4:11: “And now you are cursed from

cursed

you have done this, you are cursed

the ground”

from every beast and from every
creature of the field.”

Inverted desire

3:16: “Your desire will be toward your

4:7: “Sin … its desire is toward you, and

husband, and he will rule over you.”

you will rule it.”

Working the

3:17b: “in pain you will eat from the

4:12: “For you will work the ground ,

ground will now

ground ”

and it will no longer give its strength to

be more difficult

3:23: And God sent him from the

you.”

garden of Eden to work the ground

The human is

3:23-24: And [God] banished the

4:14: “Behold, you have banished me

banished from

human and he camped east of the

from the face of the ground and from

the divine

garden of Eden

your presence.”

presence

4:16 And Cain settled in the land of
Nod, east of Eden .

Lead Words Through Genesis 3 and 4. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

89 of 109

Notice that in each parallel element, the reader is invited to make comparisons and contrasts between the two
stories that offer insight into Cain’s character.
In both stories, the “tester” is presented as an animal—it’s a snake in Genesis 3, and in Genesis 4 “sin” is
animated as a “croucher,” an animal-like reality that wants to take the lives of others for its own.
Genesis 3 and 4 “were purposely juxtaposed for the effect they would have early on in the sequence of
primeval episodes from Eden to the Tower of Babel … The first human is probed within the garden, while
Cain is tested outside the garden. The first test is that of the first human who is warned not to eat … lest he
die. The second test is that of his son Cain who is admonished to rule over sin, so that his brother doesn’t
die … The first tester is a mysterious snake, the second is an animated character called ‘sin.’ While the man
and woman share responsibility … Cain alone is guilty for his crime.”
German, Igal (2016). The Fall Reconsidered: A Literary Synthesis of the Primeval Sin Narratives. Pickwick
Publications. 4.

Summary of "Good" in Genesis 1-4

Summary of “Good” in Genesis 1-4. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew
Bible (2019).

Genesis 1:1-2:3: God sees what is good and gives it freely.
Genesis 2:4-24: Knowing good and bad is dangerous for humans. God also knows what is not good, and
he provides good instead.
Genesis 3:1-24: Humans who want god-like knowledge of good and not good quickly end up ashamed
and guilty ...
Genesis 4:1-17: ... and dead.

Reflection Question
We talked about the repeated word “good” a few sessions ago as well. Summarize what you've learned about
how the author uses the word "good" to set up the story of the Bible.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

90 of 109

