Session 6: The Prophet to Come: Psalms 1 and 2

Key Takeaways
Psalm 1 paints a picture of a righteous human who meditates on the Torah day and night, bringing forth
life around him.
Psalm 2 describes the righteous human of Psalm 1 as the future messianic king from the line of David
who is appointed by God to rule the nations and overcome evil once and for all.
The portrait of the Spirit of God woven throughout the Bible helps us see the collaboration between
God and humans more clearly, revealing how the Bible’s origin truly is human and divine together.

The Divine Inspiration of Scripture
Where did this remarkable collection of scrolls come from? Why were they written in the first place and then
collected and formed into an organized whole?
Descriptions of the Bible’s origins found within the Bible consistently describe its origins in a partnership
between humans and God’s guiding presence through the Holy Spirit.
2 Timothy 3:16 Instructor’s Translation
All Scripture is God-breathed …
God-breathed = Greek theopneustos (θεόπνευστος), a compound word from: theos = “God” + pneustos =
“spirit/breath”

2 Peter 1:19-21 Instructor’s Translation
19

And we have the reliable prophetic word, to which you would do well to pay attention, as to a lamp

shining in a place of gloomy darkness, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts,

20

knowing this firstly important thing, that no prophecy of Scripture comes of one’s own interpretation.

21

For

prophecy was never brought by the purpose of a human, but being carried by the Holy Spirit, men spoke
from God.
In both of these texts, the apostles reflect on how the Scriptures are not merely the result of human purpose
and activity. Rather, the Bible is the product of a human-divine partnership, neither one canceling out the
other.
The following texts draw upon a whole network of texts that portray the biblical prophets as humans were who
energized and empowered by God’s Spirit to speak to their generation.
Micah 3:8 Instructor’s Translation

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

15 of 109

As for me, I am filled with power with the Spirit of Yahweh, and with justice and strength,
to announce to Jacob his rebellious act, and to Israel his sin.
Isaiah 61:1 NIV*
The Spirit of Lord Yahweh is upon me, because Yahweh has anointed me to proclaim good news to the
poor.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

2 Samuel 23:1-2 NASB*
1

Now these are the final words of David.

David the son of Jesse declares,
the man who was raised on high declares,
the anointed of the God of Jacob,
and the sweet psalmist of Israel,
2

“The Spirit of Yahweh spoke through me,

and his word was on my tongue.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Reflection Question
We’ve been talking about how the seams of the TaNaK describe the kind of leader humanity really needs. What
do Psalms 1 and 2 add to that portrait?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

16 of 109

