Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
107 of 109
Session 29: Design Patterns in the New Testament
Key Takeaways
Design patterns are the main way biblical authors unify hundreds of stories. And every pattern develops
a core theme throughout the whole biblical story that leads to Jesus.
The stories of Jesus in the Gospels have been designed to carry the patterns of the Hebrew forward to
their climax, namely, Jesus.
New Testament Examples of Design Patterns
Jesus’ trial in the wilderness recalls Israel’s trial in the wilderness. The New Testament authors portray Jesus as
the obedient Adam and Israel.
Matthew 4:1-4 NASB*
1 Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tested by the slanderer.
2 And after he had fasted forty days and forty nights, and he became hungry. 3 And the tester came and
said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread.”
4 But he answered and said, “It is written, ‘A human cannot live on bread only, but on every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.’”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher
Deuteronomy 8:2-6, 15-16 NASB*
2 You shall remember all the way which the LORD your God has led you in the wilderness these forty years,
that he might humble you, testing you, to know what was in your heart, whether you would keep his
commandments or not. 3 He humbled you and let you be hungry, and fed you with manna which you did
not know, nor did your fathers know, that he might make you understand that man does not live by bread
alone, but a human lives by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the LORD. 4 Your clothing did
not wear out on you, nor did your foot swell these forty years. 5 Thus you are to know in your heart that the
LORD your God was disciplining you just as a man disciplines his son. 6 Therefore, you shall keep the
commandments of the LORD your God, to walk in his ways and to fear him. ... 15 He led you through the
great and terrible wilderness, with its fiery serpents and scorpions and thirsty ground where there was no
water; he brought water for you out of the rock of flint. 16 In the wilderness he fed you manna which your
fathers did not know, that he might humble you and that he might test you, to do good for you in the end.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher
We see further glimpses of the pattern in passages like the following.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
108 of 109
In Exodus 16:3, the Israelites grumble. “Oh that we would have died ... in Egypt, when we sat by pots of
meat, when we ate bread to fullness.” God hears them and says he will rain “bread from the heavens” for
six days and then rest for one day.
In Exodus 16:4, Yahweh says, “I will test them, whether they will walk in my Torah or not.”
In Exodus 16:14-15, the Israelites wake up to manna. “In the morning there was a layer of dew around the
camp ... a thin flake, thin like frost ... and the Israelites saw it and said ... ‘What is it (מן הוא)?’”
In Numbers 11:4-5, the Israelites grumble again. “The mixed multitude … desired a desire, and turned
and wept … and said, ‘Who will feed us meat? We remember the fish we ate in Egypt.’”
In Numbers 11:6-7, the Israelites continue to complain. “’There’s nothing but this manna.’ Now, the
manna was like coriander seed, and its appearance had the look of fragrant gum.”
In Numbers 11:18b, God hears them. “Yahweh will give you meat and you will eat it.”
In Genesis 1-3, God’s word divinely orders the world in six days plus one day of rest, and in that time
God’s word provides the garden. In the garden, humanity is tested by the snake about forbidden food.
The “Snake-Crusher” of Genesis 3:15
Abraham’s seed who conquers enemies and blesses nations (Gen. 12:3; Gen. 22:17)
The messianic star from Jacob (Num. 24:17)
Joshua versus the five Canaanite kings (Josh. 10:24) // the five kings in Genesis 14
Jael and Sisera (Judg. 4:21; Judg. 5:26-27)
David and Goliath (1 Sam. 17)
In the new exodus, Yahweh will crush the head of the future “Pharaoh” (Hab. 3:13)
The righteous “trample the wicked under your feet” (Mal. 4:2)
In the new exodus, Yahweh will deliver his people from the region of “snake” (Heb. bashan), and “crush
the head” of his enemies (Ps. 68:21)
The royal-priest of Jerusalem will strike the head of all rebel powers until all of God’s enemies become
his footstool (Ps. 110:1, 6)
Psalm 110:1-2, 5-6 Instructor’s Translation
1 Yahweh says to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet .” 2
The LORD will extend your mighty scepter from Zion, saying, “Rule in the midst of your enemies!” ... 5
Yahweh is at your right hand ; he will crush kings on the day of his wrath. 6 He will judge the nations,
heaping up the dead and crushing the heads of the whole earth.
In the minds of Jesus and the apostles, all of these texts are connected. These connections explain their
constant allusions to Psalm 110, which activate the network of images that lead back to Genesis 3:15.
1 John 3:7-8 NIV*
7 Dear children, do not let anyone lead you astray. The one who does what is right is righteous, just as he is
righteous. 8 The one who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the
beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy what the devil has accomplished.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher
1 Corinthians 15:21-27a NIV

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
109 of 109
21 For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man. 22 For as in
Adam all die, so in Christ all will be made alive. 23 But each in turn: Christ, the firstfruits; then, when he
comes, those who belong to him. 24 Then the end will come, when he hands over the kingdom to God the
Father after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power. 25 For he must reign until he has put all
his enemies under his feet. 26 The last enemy to be destroyed is death. 27 For he “has put everything
under his feet. ”
Ephesians 1:19-23 NIV
19 and his incomparably great power for us who believe. That power is the same as the mighty strength 20
he exerted when he raised Christ from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms,
21 far above all rule and authority, power and dominion , and every name that is invoked, not only in the
present age but also in the one to come. 22 And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to
be head over everything for the church, 23 which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in
every way.
1 Peter 3:21-22 NIV
21 and this water symbolizes baptism that now saves you also—not the removal of dirt from the body but the
pledge of a clear conscience toward God. It saves you by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 22 who has gone
into heaven and is at God’s right hand —with angels, authorities and powers in submission to him.
Reflection Question
What is your main takeaway from this course overall? Or what main questions still remain for you?
