Session 22: Design Patterns and Literary Units

Key Takeaways
The Bible is like a photomosaic with identifiable smaller literary units crafted and arranged to work
together and create a larger, overarching message.
Biblical authors use repeated scenes, often with slight variations, to develop themes throughout the
story.
A concordance is a very helpful tool for identifying repeated words and phrases in our Bibles.

Design Patterns and Literary Analysis
Recall our earlier exploration of the origins of the Hebrew Bible and how it’s a collection of collections that has
been written, adapted, and edited into a unified whole. Let’s take a look at two additional analogies that will
help us understand the significance of this fact for how we read and interpret biblical literature.

Analogy 1: The Photomosaic
This portrait of Louis Armstrong, created by Robert Silvers, consists of hundreds of smaller photos taken from
actual recording sessions with Louis Armstrong.

Silvers, Robert (2000). Louis Armstrong. Photomosaic.com.

The unique unity of the larger photomosaic is achieved precisely by its composite nature. The thematic
arrangement of light/dark/gray tiny squares becomes a tool in the artists hand to create larger patterns of
color that provide an ordered, unified picture of the subject.
The Hebrew Bible displays this kind of mosaic unity on a large- and small-scale level.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

70 of 109

Analogy 2: Repeated Motifs and Themes in Film
Movie directors often create a cohesive unity with the themes and plotline of a story by repetition and
variation. By building up viewer expectations through repetition, the director can introduce variation and
surprise.
In The Lord of the Rings film trilogy, consider the motif of the “ring temptation” scene. Some characters are
tempted by the ring’s power and they succumb to it (Smeagol, Boromir, Frodo). Other characters resist its
power, but in different ways: Bilbo (just barely), Gandalf and Galadriel (through fear and trembling), and
Aragorn (like it’s no problem!).
This diverse set of responses to the ring’s power creates a rich palette of characters and a complex portrait of
power in the story.

Jackson, P. (Director). (2001-2003). The Lord of the Rings Series [Film]. New Line Cinema.

The biblical authors were masters of this technique. In fact, this basic principle of patterned repetition and
analogy is the most fundamental tool in their repertoire. And it’s accomplished through the simplest of means:
strategic repetition of key words.

Identifying Literary Units (Segmentation)
These two analogies illustrate different features of the TaNaK collection, which creates the need for two
related reading strategies.
1. Identifying literary units (segmentation): Just as a photomosaic consists of hundreds of smaller photos,
so the epic biblical narrative consists of hundreds of smaller episodes. Learning to identify the
beginning and ending of literary units that make up the larger mosaic of a biblical book helps the reader
begin to see the structure of the text.
2. Identifying repeated words and themes that weave the literary units together (coordination): Just as the
smaller photos in a photomosaic are organized according to patterns of color, light, and tone, so the
literary units of the biblical narrative are woven together through patterns of repeated words, themes,
and images. These repetitions invite the reader to see continuity and an ongoing argument that
develops through the course of the story.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

71 of 109

The next session will explore coordination, the strategy of identifying repeated words and themes.

Markers of Literary Units in Narrative
If we imagine the individual images in a photomosaic or the smallest pieces of a quilt, then segmentation
means paying attention to the boundaries of the smallest literary unit. The biblical authors have a wide variety
of techniques to indicate the opening and conclusion of literary units, depending on literary genre and
context. The most helpful introduction to this method of study is found in David Dorsey's book, The Literary
Structure of the Old Testament, chapters 1-5.
To identify the boundary markers of these literary units, one key strategy is to watch for a shift in character,
time, setting, or plot.
Example: The addition of new characters and shifting to a new time and setting, like when Abram and Sarai go
to Egypt and Pharaoh is introduced in Genesis 12:10-20. The action initiated in the unit’s beginning comes to a
resolution at its end, like in Joshua 2:1 (the spies are sent) and Joshua 2:23-24 (the spies return).
Another feature of biblical narrative that can help us identify unit markers is when the authors clearly mark the
conclusion of one narrative by the beginning of the following unit, as in Genesis chapters 14, 15, and 16 (see
14:1 , 15:1 , 16:1 , etc.).

Hierarchies of Literary Units in Biblical Narrative
When all of the above principles are applied to a literary analysis of Genesis 2-3, it yields the following outline
of the Eden narrative.

Verses

Unit

Part

Movement

2:4-6 No garden, humans, or rain

2:4-17

2:4-25

2:4-3:24

From Wasteland

From Isolated

The Eden

to Eden

Wasteland to

Narrative: From

Communion in

Garden to Exile

2:7-9 God plants a garden and forms
human

Eden

2:10-14 The Eden river flows to become
four rivers

2:15-17 Human put in the garden +
divine command

2:18-20 Problem: a human alone

2:18-25
From Isolation to

2:21-23 Solution: two humans out of

Communion

Identifying the Literary Units of Genesis 2-3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to
Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

72 of 109

Verses

Unit

Part

Movement

one

2:24-25 Two humans married

3:1-5 Dialogue between snake and

3:1-13

woman

Folly and the Fall

3:6-7 Woman and man eat from the
tree

3:8-13 Dialogue between God and
humans

3:14-15 Curse on the snake

3:16 Consequences for the woman

3:14-24

3:14-24

The Fallout

The Fallout and
Exile from Eden

3:17-19 Consequences for the man

3:20-21 Provision of garments

3:22-24
Humans exiled from Eden

Identifying the Literary Units of Genesis 2-3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to
Noah (2020).

When the same information is displayed in a vertical form, you can begin to see the hierarchy of context for
any given story, which is itself made up of many nested layers of smaller episodes and scenes.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

73 of 109

Nesting Literary Units in Genesis. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
(2019).

This segmentation of biblical narrative is immensely helpful as a first step in understanding, but it raises the
need for the next step: studying how all these different literary units have been woven together with
developing themes and ideas. This is the study of coordination in biblical narrative.

Reflection Question
What are some different ways to identify where literary units begin and end? Why is this important?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

74 of 109

