Session 3: The Ancient Shape of the Scriptures

Key Takeaways
Jesus’ Bible was a three-part collection of scrolls called the TaNaK. TaNaK is a designation for the
Hebrew Bible taken from the first letter of its three major sections. T stands for Torah, which is Hebrew
for "instruction;" N is for Nevi'im, meaning "prophets;" and K is for Ketuvim, meaning "writings."
The three-part macro design dates to somewhere in the 3rd-2nd century B.C.E. This order is preserved
in modern Jewish tradition and is well-attested in Second Temple Jewish texts and the New Testament.

The Macro-Shape of the TaNaK
Luke 24:25-27 NIV
25

[Jesus] said to [the disciples], “How foolish you are, and how slow to believe all that the prophets have

spoken!

26

Did not the Messiah have to suffer these things and then enter his glory?”

27

And beginning with

Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.
The Hebrew and Greek Scriptures that Jesus and the apostles read consisted of a three-part collection called
the TaNaKh (a.k.a. TaNaK) in later Jewish tradition.
The final composition of the TaNaK scrolls dates somewhere in the 3rd-2nd centuries B.C.E. This date is
provided by the latest books added to the collection (Chronicles and Esther in the 4th-3rd century B.C.E.), and
also by the probable date of the final editorial activity that adapted scrolls into the collection (the expanded
editions of Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, etc.).

TaNaK Compared with the Christian Old Testament
The organization and order of the TaNaK differs in a couple significant ways from the way the same content is
arranged in the Old Testament of modern Christian Bibles.

TaNaK

Christian Old Testament

Torah (The Law)

Pentateuch

TaNaK Compared with the Christian Old Testament. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

9 of 109

TaNaK

Christian Old Testament

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,

Deuteronomy

Deuteronomy

Nevi’im (The Prophets)

History

Former Prophets

Joshua, Judges, Ruth

Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings

1-2 Samuel, 1-2 Kings
1-2 Chronicles

Latter Prophets

Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther

Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah,
Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah,
Malachi

Poetry
Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs

Ketuvim (The Writings)

Prophets

Psalms, Job, Proverbs

Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations

Ruth, Song of Songs, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations,

Ezekiel, Daniel

Esther [The Megillot]

Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah,

Daniel, Ezra-Nehemiah, Chronicles

Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah,
Malachi

TaNaK Compared with the Christian Old Testament. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Ancient Evidence for the Shape of the TaNaK
When Jesus alludes to the order of the Hebrew Bible, he assumes a three-part design, which agrees with other
contemporary Jewish authors who allude to the ordered sections.
Luke 24:44: “This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written
about me in the Torah of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.”
Luke 11:50-51: “Therefore this generation will be held responsible for the blood of all the prophets that
has been shed since the beginning of the world, from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who
was killed between the altar and the sanctuary.”
Abel was murdered by Cain in Genesis 4, and Zechariah son of Jehoiadah was murdered by Joash in
2 Chronicles 24, which corresponds to the TaNaK order.
Prologue to the Wisdom of Ben Sirach: “Many great teachings have been given to us through the Law [=
Torah], and the Prophets [= Nevi’im], and the others that follow them [= Ketuvim] … So my grandfather
Yeshua devoted himself especially to the reading of the Law and the Prophets and the other scrolls of
our Ancestors.”
Dead Sea Scrolls (4QMMT): “The scrolls of Moses, the words of the prophets, and of David.”

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

10 of 109

Philo of Alexandria (De Vita Contemplativa, 25): “The laws and the oracles given by inspiration through
the prophets and the Psalms, and the other scrolls whereby knowledge and piety are increased and
completed.”

Reflection Question
What are some of the main differences between the TaNaK arrangement and the Christian arrangement of the
Old Testament/Hebrew Bible? Could a different arrangement change the meaning of a text in the Bible?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

11 of 109

