Session 7: An Important Premise: The Inspiration of
Scripture

Key Takeaways
The Bible’s narratives, poems, histories, letters, prophecies, and other writings come from a profound
collaboration between humanity and God.
Whenever the biblical authors talk about the Spirit’s activity, they describe the Spirit working with and
through God’s human partners, not in spite of human partners.
God’s divine word is communicated through the words of the human authors. So when we talk about
the human author, we are talking about the divine author at the same time.

The Divine-Human Partnership

Escher, M.C. (1948). Drawing Hands. Art Hive.

We are asked to imagine what seems like a paradox that is well illustrated by the famous image by M.C. Escher
called “Drawing Hands” (1948).
The Scriptures claim to be the product of a divine-human partnership. Both are necessary, but neither alone
are sufficient causes to explain the origins and nature of the biblical text. God’s involvement does not diminish
the human dimension. Within the biblical story, the Holy Spirit enhances and energizes human beings to be
more fully the divine-image they were created to be. The agency of God’s Spirit does not work at the expense
of human agency. Rather, humans become more human through the empowering influence of the Spirit. This
is true of all the Spirit-empowered figures in the Bible (Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, the prophets, the
apostles, etc.).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

18 of 109

When we look at biblical descriptions of the writing of biblical books, notice how the prophetic figure is not in
a trance but is in full possession of their faculties (see Exod. 17:8-14; Jer. 36; Isa. 8). This gives us an important
window into the production of biblical literature.
On the occasions where we do see prophets in a state of elevated consciousness, they are not writing or
producing texts. Instead, they are experiencing a vision or interpreting the meaning of a vision in light of their
understanding of the Scriptures (Dan. 9-11; Ezek. 1-3).
Dive deeper into the portrait of the Holy Spirit in the Hebrew Bible with these books.
Knowing the Holy Spirit through the Old Testament, Christopher J.H. Wright
Presence, Power, and Promise: The Role of the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, David G. Firth and Paul
D. Wegner

Visualizing the Divine-Human Partnership

Overlap of Divine and Human in Scripture’s Origin. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

19 of 109

Meaning and Significance in the Inspiration of Scripture. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Reflection Question
Do you or those in your context tend to view the spiritual and physical realms as very distinct? How do you
think this affects your view of the inspiration of Scripture?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

20 of 109

