Session 28: Narrative Analogy: Jacob and Genesis 3

Key Takeaways
Throughout the entire storyline of the Hebrew Bible, there will be snake-people and humanity-people,
and they are going to be at enmity with one another in narrative after narrative.
In the Hebrew Bible narratives, people can switch back and forth between being a seed of the woman
and a seed of the snake. Even the people God calls to be his blessing to the world can become the seed
of the snake.
The birth of the nation of Israel is depicted as the birth of snake seed. The whole drama of the Jacob
story is how God is going to turn Jacob (the snake-like deceiver) into a human.

Genesis 16 Recalls Earlier Narratives
Genesis 16

Genesis 3 and 6

16:1-2a: Now, Sarai, Abram’s wife had borne him no

2:21-22: And Yahweh God took from one of the

children, and she had an Egyptian slave whose

sides of the human … and he built (‫ )בנה‬the side

name was Hagar. And Sarai said to Abram, “Look,

into a woman.

Yahweh has prevented me from giving birth.
Please go in to my slave; maybe I can be built up (

‫ )בנה‬through her.”

3:17: Because you listened to the voice of your wife
(‫ לקול‬+ ‫)שמע‬

16:2b: And Abram listened to the voice of Sarai (

‫ לקול‬+ ‫)שמע‬
16:3-4: and Sarai took (‫ )ותתן‬Hagar … and she gave

6:2-4: And the sons of God saw (‫ )ראה‬the

(‫ )ותתן‬her to Abram her husband (‫ )אישה‬as a wife (

daughters of humanity, that they were good, and

‫)לאשה‬. … And he went into her.

they took (‫ )לקח‬for themselves wives (‫ … )נשים‬when
they went into (‫ אל‬+ ‫ )יבאו‬the daughters of
humanity, and they gave birth (‫)ילד‬.

3:6: and the woman (‫ … )אשה‬took (‫ )ותקח‬the fruit …
and she gave (‫ )ותתן‬also to her husband (‫)לאישה‬,
and he ate.

Genesis 16 Recalls Earlier Narratives. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

96 of 109

Genesis 16

Genesis 3 and 6

16:4: and she [Hagar] saw that (‫ )ותרא כי‬she was

3:6: And the woman saw that (‫ )ותרא כי‬the tree was

pregnant, and her master was cursed in her eyes (

good (‫ )טוב‬for food, and desirable to the eyes (

‫)בעיניה‬.

‫)לענים‬

Birth becomes curse to Sarai instead of blessing

“cursed is the ground because of you”

16:6: Abram said to Sarai, “Behold, your slave is in
your hand, do to her what is good (‫ )טוב‬in your
eyes (‫)בעיניך‬.”

16:8: And [the angel] said to Hagar … “From where

3:9: “And Yahweh God called to the human and

(‫ )אי מזה‬have you come, and to where do you go?”

said, “Where are you (‫”?)איכה‬

16:10: And the angel of Yahweh said to her [Hagar]:

3:16: To the woman he said, “I will greatly multiply (

“I will greatly multiply (‫ )הרבה ארבה‬your seed … You

‫ )הרבה ארבה‬your grief and pregnancy (‫)הריונך‬, and
in grief you will give birth (‫”)ילד‬

are pregnant (‫)הרה‬, will give birth (‫ )ילד‬to a son.”

Genesis 16 Recalls Earlier Narratives. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

In this analogy, Abram and Sarai’s actions are set on analogy to both Genesis 6:1-4 and 3:1-9, and characters
become linked to counterparts in earlier stories through repeated words and phrases.
Hagar is linked to the tree of knowing good and bad and to the daughters of humanity.
Sarai is linked to Eve and to the rebel sons of God.
Abram is linked to Adam.

Genesis 25 and 27, and Genesis 3
Jacob the Snake in Genesis 25

20 and Isaac was a son of forty years

a when he took Rebekah,
b the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean of Paddan-aram,
b’ the sister of Lavan the Aramean,
a’ to be his wife.

a

21 And Isaac petitioned Yahweh

b
a’

on behalf of his wife, because she was barren;

and Yahweh was petitioned by him

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

97 of 109

a

b’

and Rebekah his wife conceived.

22 And they struck one another, the sons within her,

and she said, “If it is so, why then am I?”
And she went to inquire of Yahweh.
23 And Yahweh said to her,

a

“Two nations are in your womb;

a'

and two peoples will be separated from your body;
b

and one people shall be stronger than the other;

b'

and the older shall serve the younger.”

24 And when her days were fulfilled to give birth,

behold, there were twins within her womb.

a

25 And the first came out red (‫)אדם‬,

all over like a hairy garment (‫)שער‬

b

c
a'

and they named him Esau (‫)עשו‬.

26 And afterward his brother came out

and his hand was grabbing the heel (‫ )עקב‬of Esau,

b'

c'

and he called his name Yaaqov (‫;)יעקב‬

and Isaac was a son of sixty years
when she gave birth to them.

Genesis 25:20-26. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).
There is only one other text in the Hebrew Bible that describes one character doing something to the “heel” (

‫ )עקב‬of another character.
Genesis 3:14-15 Instructor’s Translation
14

And Yahweh God said to the snake ...

15

“And I will put enmity

between you and the woman,
and between your seed and her seed;
he shall strike you on the head,
and you shall strike him on the heel (‫)עקב‬.”
The very next narrative about Jacob shows him deceiving his brother with food in order to usurp his place as
the firstborn.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

98 of 109

Rebekah and Jacob Deceive Isaac and Esau in Genesis 27

27:1-5 Isaac Instructs Esau To Prepare Food To Receive the Blessing
27:1 And Isaac called for Esau his older son …

27:6-17 Rebekah Instructs Yaaqov To Prepare Food To Steal Esau’s Blessing
5-6 And Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke (‫ )בדבר‬to Esau his son …

and she said to Yaaqov her son, “Behold …”
8 “And now, my son, listen to my voice ... go now to the flock and take for me …”
15 She took the clothes of Esau her older son ... and clothed Yaaqov her younger son

27:18-29 Yaaqov Deceives His Father Isaac To Steal the Blessing
18-19 And he went to his father, and he said, “Who are you my son?”

“I am Esau your firstborn … arise and eat … so that you may bless me!”

27:27-29 Poem of Blessing
27-29 “See, the smell of my son ...”

27:30-40 Esau Begs His Father Isaac To Give Him a Blessing
31-32 And he went to his father, and said, “Let my father arise and eat so that you may bless me!”

“Who are you my son?” “I am Esau your firstborn.”

27:39-40 Poem of Non-Blessing
39-40 “Behold, away from the fertility of the earth shall be your dwelling ...”

27:41-45 Rebekah Instructs Yaaqov To Flee to Paddan Aram
27:42 And it was reported to Rebekah thewords (‫ )דבר‬of Esau her older son

and she sent and called to Yaaqov her smaller son and said, “Behold …”
27:43 “And now, my son, listen to my voice, arise and flee for yourself”

27:46-28:5 Isaac Blesses and Instructs Yaaqov To Go to Aram to Get Married
28:1 And Isaac called for Yaaqov …

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

99 of 109

Genesis 27:1-28:5. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Narrative Analogies Between Genesis 27 and Genesis 1-3

Genesis 27

Genesis 1-3

27:1: And [Isaac’s] eyes were weak/dim to be

3:7: The humans’ eyes are “opened” because of the

seeing

forbidden food.

27:4, 7: Isaac requests that Esau bring fresh game

3:6: and she took and she ate (‫)אכל‬

“that I may eat (‫)אכל‬, on which account (‫ )בעבור‬my
being will bless you (‫ )ברך‬before I die (‫”)מות‬

3:17: “cursed (‫ )ארורה‬is the ground on account of
you (‫”)בעבורך‬

27:8: “And now my son, listen to my voice (

3:17: And to the man he said, “Because you have

‫ )שמע בקול‬to what I am commanding (‫ )צוה‬you.”

listened to the voice (‫ בקול‬+ ‫ )שמע‬of your wife and
ate of the tree that I commanded (‫ )צוה‬you …”

27:9: “Go now to the flock and take (‫ )לקח‬for me

3:6: And she took (‫ )לקח‬from its fruit and she ate (

two young goats, good ones (‫ … )טוב‬that he may

‫)אכל‬

eat (‫ )אכל‬and bless (‫ )ברך‬you before his death (‫מות‬
)”
27:12-13: “Perhaps I will be in his eyes (‫ )עיניו‬like one

3:17: And to the man he said, “Because you have

who makes a mockery, and I will bring upon myself

listened to the voice (‫ בקול‬+ ‫ )שמע‬of your wife and

a curse and not a blessing (‫)קללה ולא ברכה‬.” And

ate of the tree that I commanded (‫ )צוה‬you …

she said, “May your curse (‫ )קללה‬be upon me my

cursed (‫ )ארורה‬is the ground on account of you.”

son. Just listen to my voice (‫)שמע בקול‬, and go and
take (‫ )לקח‬for me.”
27:14-15: And he went and he took (‫ )ויקח‬and he

3:6: And the woman saw that the tree was good for

brought to his mother … And she took (‫ )ותקח‬the

eating, and desirable (‫ )תאוה‬to the eyes, and

clothes of Esau her son, the bigger one, the

desirable (‫ )נחמד‬for becoming wise, and she took (

desirable ones (‫ )החמדת‬which were with her

‫)לקח‬

27:15: And she clothed (‫ )ותלבש‬Jacob her son, the

3:21: And God made for the man and his wife

little one, and with the skins (‫ )ערת‬of the goats she

garments of skin (‫ )עור‬and he clothed them (‫וילבשם‬

clothed (‫ )והלבישה‬over his hands

)

Analogies Between Genesis 27 and Genesis 1-3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

100 of 109

Genesis 27

Genesis 1-3

27:17: And she gave (‫ )ותתן‬the tasty foods and the

3:6: and she took from its fruit and she ate and she

bread which she made into the hand of Jacob her

gave (‫ )ותתן‬to her husband and he ate.

son.

27:33: “Who then is the one who hunted game and

2:16: “From every/all (‫ )מכל‬tree in the garden you

brought it to me and I ate from all (‫”?… )ואכל מכל‬

may eat (‫ ;”)תאכל‬cf. also 3:1-2

27:35-36: “Your brother came in deceit (‫)במרמה‬,

3:13: And she said, “The snake deceived me (‫)נשא‬

and he took (‫ )ויקח‬your blessing.” And [Esau] said,

and I ate”

“Isn’t he rightly called heel/deceiver (‫)יעקב‬, for he
heeled/deceived (‫ )עקב‬me two times! He took (‫)לקח‬
my birthright (‫)בכרה‬, and he took (‫ )לקח‬my blessing
(‫)ברכה‬.”

27:43: “And now my son, listen to my voice (

3:17: “Because you have listened to the voice (

‫”)שמע בקול‬

‫ בקוֹל‬+ ‫ )שמע‬of your wife”

27:44-45: “Dwell [in Aram] for a few days, until …

3:13: And God said to the woman, “What is this you

he forgets that which you have done to him (

have done (‫”?)מה זאת עשית‬

‫”)את אשר עשית לו‬
3:14: And God said to the snake, “Because you
have done this thing (‫”)כי עשית זאת‬

28:3: “May El Shaddai bless you and make your

1:28: And God blessed them and said, “Be fruitful

fruitful and multiply

and multiply”

Analogies Between Genesis 27 and Genesis 1-3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Rachel Replays Sarah’s/Eve’s Sin in Genesis 30-31

Rachel and Bilhah

Sarah and Hagar: Genesis 16

Genesis 3:6: And the woman (‫ )האשה‬saw (‫ )ותרא‬that the tree was good for eating … and she took (‫)ותקח‬
from its fruit and she ate and she gave (‫ )ותתן‬also to her husband (‫ )אישה‬with her and he ate.

Genesis 3:17: And God said to the man, “Because you have listened

to the voice (‫ לקול‬+ ‫ )שמע‬of your

Rachel Replays Sarah and Eve. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

101 of 109

Rachel and Bilhah

Sarah and Hagar: Genesis 16

wife …”

30:1: And Rachel saw (‫ )ותרא‬that she had not given

Gen 16:1: And Sarai … had not given birth for

birth for Jacob and she was jealous of her sister

Abram

30:2: And Jacob said, “Am I in the place of God

16:2: And Sarai said … “Behold (‫)הנה‬, Yahweh has

who has withheld from you the fruit of the womb?”

bound me from giving birth. Please go into my
slave (‫)שפחה‬. Perhaps I can be built up from her (

30:3: “Behold (‫)הנה‬, my maid-slave (‫ )אמתי‬Bilhah,
go into her and she will give birth upon my knees,
and I will be built up, me too, from her (‫ מן‬+ ‫)בנה‬.”

‫ מן‬+ ‫)בנה‬.” And Abraham listened to her voice (
‫ בקול‬+ ‫)שמע‬.

30:4: And she gave to him (‫ )ותתן לו‬Bilhah her slave

16:3: And Sarai took … her slave (‫ … )שפחה‬and she

(‫ )שפחה‬as a wife (‫ )לאשה‬and he went into her

gave her to (‫ )–ותתן ל‬Abram … as a wife (‫)לאשה‬, and
he went into her

30:5: And [Bilhah] became pregnant

16:4: And [Hagar] became pregnant and when she
saw (‫ )ותרא‬she was pregnant, her mistress was
cursed in her eyes.

30:6: And Rachel said, “God has judged for me

16:11: “Behold you are pregnant, and you will bear a

and also he has listened

son and call his name ‘ Yishma el’ (‫ )ישמעאל‬for

to my voice (

‫ בקול‬+ ‫”)שמע‬

Yahweh has listened (‫ )שמע‬to your suffering.”

Rachel Replays Sarah and Eve. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

Rachel’s actions with Jacob are both an intensified replay of Sarah’s actions with Abraham and a contrast with
Rebekah from Genesis 25:21.
Sarah is barren, so she schemes her own way to produce the promised seed, and she accuses Abraham
when the plan doesn’t work.
Rebekah is barren, but Isaac intercedes for her and Yahweh restores fertility to her womb.
Rachel is barren, accuses her husband for not giving her sons, and then schemes her own way (identical
to Sarah’s) to produce seed.

The Pattern of the Late-Comer
This story makes it clear that the book of Genesis is arranged as a sequence of generations feuding over the
possession of abundance, blessing, and royal power.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

102 of 109

Divinely Chosen Late-Comer

Non-Chosen Early-Comer

Adam & Eve

Beast of the field (= snake)

Abel/Seth

Cain

Shem

Japheth (also Ham the younger)

Abram

Nahor, Haran

Isaac

Ishmael

Jacob

Esau

Joseph

The brothers

Judah

Reuben, Simeon, Levi

Late-comer Pattern. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible
(2019).

Later Iterations of the Genesis 3 Pattern
Joshua 6-7: Achan’s Sin at Jericho
Achan’s sin at Jericho reiterates the Genesis 3 pattern.
Joshua 6 describes Israel’s victory at Jericho. They march for six days, and on the seventh day they
march seven times and shout. This reflects Genesis 1, with six days of work plus the seventh day of rest.
Joshua 6:18-19: Joshua says to the people, “Only watch yourselves, don’t take any of the dedicated
plunder, lest you take from the dedicated plunder and place it in the camp of Israel ... and bring trouble
(‫ )עכר‬to it. All the silver and gold and articles (‫ )כלים‬of bronze and iron are holy to Yahweh.”
Joshua 7:1: “But the sons of Israel committed treachery with the dedicated plunder, and Achan, the son
of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, he took from the dedicated plunder.”
Joshua 7:11: “Israel has sinned, and they have broken my covenant which I commanded them, and also
they have taken from the dedicated things and stolen, and also they have lied and placed it in their
baggage (lit. “articles” ‫)בכליהם‬.”
Joshua 7:19-21: “And Joshua said to Achan, ‘... Tell me please, what have you done? Don’t conceal it from
me.’ And Achan answered Joshua and said, ‘Truly, I have sinned against Yahweh God of Israel. Such and
such have I done: I saw (‫ )ראה‬among the plunder a cloak of Shinar (‫)אדרת שנער‬, a good one (‫)טוב‬, and
two hundred shekels of silver ... and I desired them (‫)חמד‬, and I took them (‫ )לקח‬and look, they are
hidden in the ground in the middle of my tent, and the silver is under it.’”

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

103 of 109

2 Samuel 11: David and Bathsheba
2 Samuel 11:2-4 Instructor’s Translation
And it came about at the time of evening, that David arose from his bed and walked about on the roof of the
house of the king, and he saw a woman bathing on the roof, and the woman was good of sight, very. And
David sent and he inquired about the woman ... and he sent messengers and he took her and he went into
her ...
The Genesis 3 pattern of see and take is a core element of the biblical narrative and it repeats in various forms
throughout the Hebrew Bible.

Recommended Resources: Narrative Analogy
Robert Alter, The Art of the Biblical Narrative, ch. 3
Yair Zakovitch, “Through the Looking Glass: Reflection/ Inversions of Genesis Stories in the Bible,” pp.
139-152
Brian Sigmon, ”Between Eden and Egypt: Echoes of the Garden Narrative in the Story of Joseph and His
Brothers”
Moshe Garsiel, The First Book of Samuel: A Literary Study of Comparative Structures, Analogies, and
Parallels
Jonathan Grossman, “Dynamic Analogies in Esther,” pp. 394-414
Joshua Berman, Narrative Analogy in the Hebrew Bible

Narrative Analogy and Inner-Biblical Hyperlinks

Level of

Citation

Allusion

Echo

Explicit

Implicit

Subtle

Assumed

Expected

Hoped for

Quotation of

Key words from

Key words, images, themes

source text

source text

from source text

Communication

Reader’s
Comprehension

Technique

Analogy

Narrative Analogy and Inner-Biblical Hyperlinks. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

104 of 109

Citation

Allusion

Echo

Parallel design patterns of character, plot, setting, key words
Indicating an intended analogy between whole storylines

Narrative Analogy and Inner-Biblical Hyperlinks. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Citation: An explicitly marked quotation from an earlier biblical text. Example: Joshua 8:30-35 crossreferences and quotes Deuteronomy 27:4-6.
Allusion: A non-explicit form of reference to an another text marked by multiple conspicuous words or images
from a known source text. In this case, the full meaning of the text will be diminished if the reader fails to
recognize the implied reference to the earlier text. Example: Numbers 14:18-19 alludes back to Exodus 34:6-7.
Echo: A more subtle technique that may involve the inclusion of a single phrase, word, or image that alerts the
reader to a reference to an another text. The text is fully intelligible to readers who don’t recognize the echo,
but those who do will experience a “surplus of significance” beyond the face value meaning of the text.
Example: The Genesis 3 design pattern described above includes echoes.
In his article, “Identifying Inner-Biblical Allusions,” Jeffrey Leonard gives four criteria for identifying intertextual
allusions and hyperlinks (Leonard, 2008).
1. Clusters of shared words or phrases
2. Shared language consisting of unique vocabulary
3. Shared language within thematically similar contexts
4. Shared language between units that are united by other literary strategies (similar plot, themes,
settings)

Literary Echoes and a Modern Example
“Metalepsis [is] the literary technique of citing or echoing a small bit of a precursor text in such a way that
the reader can grasp the significance of the echo only by recalling or recovering the original context of the
echo and reading the two texts in fruitful juxtaposition. The effect of such an intertextual linkage lies in the
unstated or suppressed points of correspondence between the two texts ... creating a ‘cave of resonant
signification.’”
Hays, Richard B. (2017). Echoes of Scripture in the Gospels. Baylor University Press. 10-11.
On the night of Barack Obama’s presidential election victory in 2008, he declared that American citizens
could “put their hands on the arc of history and bend it once more toward the hope of a better day.” This
phrase was an allusion to a famous line of a speech of Martin Luther King Jr., but the new context also signaled
a series of adaptations to the new rhetorical setting.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

105 of 109

Barack Obama

Martin Luther King Jr.

“Tonight begins our chance to put our hands on

“The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends

the arc of history and bend it once more toward

towards justice.”

the hope of a better day.”
A word of assurance that the civil rights struggle
A word of exhortation to recommit one’s energies

was governed by a larger providential purpose that

to building a better world, emphasizing the

would prevail.

necessity of human agency to enact change.

“We may not get there in one year or even in one

“I’ve seen the promised land. I may not get there

term, but America, I promise you, we as a people

with you.”

will get there.”
King was depicting himself as a Moses
Obama depicts himself as Joshua the successor to

participating in a new exodus, passing the baton to

Moses (= King), who will play his part in leading

Joshua (= his listeners).

America to the next step towards the promised
land.

Obama Speech MLK Allusions. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

This is precisely the kind of explicit and more subtle use of a “cultural encyclopedia” that happens in all forms
of communication, especially between people steeped in traditional literature.

Reflection Question
In the birth story of Jacob and Esau in Genesis 25, in what way is Jacob like the snake from Genesis 3? What
tension does this create for the overall storyline?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

106 of 109

Session 29: Design Patterns in the New Testament

Key Takeaways
Design patterns are the main way biblical authors unify hundreds of stories. And every pattern develops
a core theme throughout the whole biblical story that leads to Jesus.
The stories of Jesus in the Gospels have been designed to carry the patterns of the Hebrew forward to
their climax, namely, Jesus.

New Testament Examples of Design Patterns
Jesus’ trial in the wilderness recalls Israel’s trial in the wilderness. The New Testament authors portray Jesus as
the obedient Adam and Israel.
Matthew 4:1-4 NASB*
1

Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tested by the slanderer.

2

And after he had fasted forty days and forty nights, and he became hungry.

3

And the tester came and

said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread.”
4

But he answered and said, “It is written, ‘A human cannot live on bread only, but on every word that

proceeds out of the mouth of God.’”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Deuteronomy 8:2-6, 15-16 NASB*
2

You shall remember all the way which the LORD your God has led you in the wilderness these forty years,

that he might humble you, testing you, to know what was in your heart, whether you would keep his
commandments or not.

3

He humbled you and let you be hungry, and fed you with manna which you did

not know, nor did your fathers know, that he might make you understand that man does not live by bread
alone, but a human lives by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of the LORD. 4 Your clothing did
not wear out on you, nor did your foot swell these forty years.

5

Thus you are to know in your heart that the

LORD your God was disciplining you just as a man disciplines his son.

6

Therefore, you shall keep the

commandments of the LORD your God, to walk in his ways and to fear him. ...

15

He led you through the

great and terrible wilderness, with its fiery serpents and scorpions and thirsty ground where there was no
water; he brought water for you out of the rock of flint.

16

In the wilderness he fed you manna which your

fathers did not know, that he might humble you and that he might test you, to do good for you in the end.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

We see further glimpses of the pattern in passages like the following.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

107 of 109

In Exodus 16:3, the Israelites grumble. “Oh that we would have died ... in Egypt, when we sat by pots of
meat, when we ate bread to fullness.” God hears them and says he will rain “bread from the heavens” for
six days and then rest for one day.
In Exodus 16:4, Yahweh says, “I will test them, whether they will walk in my Torah or not.”
In Exodus 16:14-15, the Israelites wake up to manna. “In the morning there was a layer of dew around the
camp ... a thin flake, thin like frost ... and the Israelites saw it and said ... ‘What is it (‫”’?)הוא מן‬
In Numbers 11:4-5, the Israelites grumble again. “The mixed multitude … desired a desire, and turned
and wept … and said, ‘Who will feed us meat? We remember the fish we ate in Egypt.’”
In Numbers 11:6-7, the Israelites continue to complain. “’There’s nothing but this manna.’ Now, the
manna was like coriander seed, and its appearance had the look of fragrant gum.”
In Numbers 11:18b, God hears them. “Yahweh will give you meat and you will eat it.”
In Genesis 1-3, God’s word divinely orders the world in six days plus one day of rest, and in that time
God’s word provides the garden. In the garden, humanity is tested by the snake about forbidden food.

The “Snake-Crusher” of Genesis 3:15
Abraham’s seed who conquers enemies and blesses nations (Gen. 12:3; Gen. 22:17)
The messianic star from Jacob (Num. 24:17)
Joshua versus the five Canaanite kings (Josh. 10:24) // the five kings in Genesis 14
Jael and Sisera (Judg. 4:21; Judg. 5:26-27)
David and Goliath (1 Sam. 17)
In the new exodus, Yahweh will crush the head of the future “Pharaoh” (Hab. 3:13)
The righteous “trample the wicked under your feet” (Mal. 4:2)
In the new exodus, Yahweh will deliver his people from the region of “snake” (Heb. bashan), and “crush
the head” of his enemies (Ps. 68:21)
The royal-priest of Jerusalem will strike the head of all rebel powers until all of God’s enemies become
his footstool (Ps. 110:1, 6)
Psalm 110:1-2, 5-6 Instructor’s Translation
1

Yahweh says to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet .”

The LORD will extend your mighty scepter from Zion, saying, “Rule in the midst of your enemies!” ...
Yahweh is at your right hand ; he will crush kings on the day of his wrath.

6

2

5

He will judge the nations,

heaping up the dead and crushing the heads of the whole earth.
In the minds of Jesus and the apostles, all of these texts are connected. These connections explain their
constant allusions to Psalm 110, which activate the network of images that lead back to Genesis 3:15.
1 John 3:7-8 NIV*
7

Dear children, do not let anyone lead you astray. The one who does what is right is righteous, just as he is

righteous.

8

The one who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the

beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy what the devil has accomplished.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

1 Corinthians 15:21-27a NIV

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

108 of 109

21

For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man.

Adam all die, so in Christ all will be made alive.
comes, those who belong to him.

24

23

26

For as in

But each in turn: Christ, the firstfruits; then, when he

Then the end will come, when he hands over the kingdom to God the

Father after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power.
his enemies under his feet.

22

25

For he must reign until he has put all

The last enemy to be destroyed is death.

27

For he “has put everything

under his feet. ”
Ephesians 1:19-23 NIV
19

and his incomparably great power for us who believe. That power is the same as the mighty strength

20

he exerted when he raised Christ from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms,
21

far above all rule and authority, power and dominion , and every name that is invoked, not only in the

present age but also in the one to come.

22

be head over everything for the church,

And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to

23

which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in

every way.
1 Peter 3:21-22 NIV
21

and this water symbolizes baptism that now saves you also—not the removal of dirt from the body but the

pledge of a clear conscience toward God. It saves you by the resurrection of Jesus Christ,

22

who has gone

into heaven and is at God’s right hand —with angels, authorities and powers in submission to him.

Reflection Question
What is your main takeaway from this course overall? Or what main questions still remain for you?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

109 of 109

