Session 14: How Biblical Poetry Communicates

Key Takeaways
Hebrew poetry is shaped into a line-rhythm or verse. It is not metrical (based on syllable counts) but a
form of free verse.
Hebrew poetry uses intentional, creative language (e.g., heavy use of metaphor) with unique word
combinations, repetition, patterns, and hyperlinking to other parts of Scripture.
The biblical authors build out their theology of God’s character, essence, and purpose from within their
worldview.

The Poetics of Biblical Poetry: Translation and Literary Design of
Psalm 29

1 Give to Yahweh, O sons of God

give to Yahweh glory and strength .
2 Give to Yahweh the glory due his name;

worship Yahweh in the majesty of his holiness .

3 The voice of Yahweh is over the waters ;

the God of glory thunders,
Yahweh over the mighty waters .

4 The voice of Yahweh is powerful;

the voice of Yahweh is majestic ;
5 the voice of Yahweh breaks the cedars ;

Yahweh breaks in pieces the cedars of Lebanon .

6 He makes Lebanon leap like a calf ,

Mount Sirion like a young wild ox .

7 The voice of Yahweh strikes with flashes of fire.
8 The voice of Yahweh shakes the desert;

Yahweh shakes the Desert of Kadesh;
9 the voice of Yahweh shakes apart the oaks

and strips the forests bare.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

38 of 109

And in his temple everything shouts, “ Glory !”
10 Yahweh sits enthroned over the flood ;

Yahweh is enthroned as King eternal.
11 Yahweh gives strength to his people;

Yahweh blesses his people with peace.

Psalm 29. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

Definitions and Features of Poetry in General
Encyclopedia Brittanica defines poetry as “a kind of literature that evokes a concentrated imaginative
awareness of one’s experience or emotions by means of well-crafted language that is chosen for its meaning,
sound, and rhythm.”
“Poetry is a kind of human language that says more, and says it more intensely than does ordinary
language.”
Perrine, Laurence (1968). Sound and Sense: An Introduction to Poetry. Harcourt College Publishers. 3-4.
“Poetry conveys thought; there is something the poet wants to communicate. And poetry conveys that
thought in a self-conscious manner, through a special structuring of the language that calls attention to the
‘how’ of the message as well as the ‘what.’ In fact, in good poetry, the ‘how’ and the ‘what’ become
indistinguishable. As Robert Alter puts it: ‘Poetry ... is not just a set of techniques for saying impressively
what could be said otherwise. Rather, it is a particular way of imagining the world.’”
Berlin, Adele (1996). “Introduction to Biblical Poetry.” New Interpreter’s Bible, Vol. IV. 301-315.

Typical Features of Poetry
Density of expression, terseness = fewer words than normal speech
Intentionally creative use of language (unique word combinations or repetition)
Heavy use of imagery and metaphor: combining images that don’t normally occur to us (defeat in battle
= washed away by chaotic waters)
Poetry invites you into an imaginative experience in order to communicate more
A rhythmic use of language (meter, rhyme, measure) that places constraints on the poet and forces an
economy of expression, a compression of thought so words have to perform unusual functions.
Psalm 29 uses these poetic features to take the reader from the landscape of Israel to the cosmic throne of
God where he rules over the storm and the waters.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

39 of 109

Rough Map of Israel. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the Hebrew
Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

40 of 109

God’s Throne Over All Creation. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Reflection Question
Summarize what you’ve learned so far about how biblical poetry works. What are some of the things to look
for as you read?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

41 of 109

