Session 10: The Origin of the Bible From a Historical
Perspective

Key Takeaways
The Bible’s divinity and authority doesn’t negate the human processes that brought it into existence.
The Hebrew Bible is a collection of collections made up of preexisting textual materials from different
periods of Israel’s history and literature.
We find clues throughout the Hebrew Bible that reveal how each book is an organized collection of
preexisting materials that have been brought into, and play a new function within, a new composition.

The Origins of the Bible From a Historical Perspective
The written origins of the Bible are also illuminated through historical research into the technology of writing,
text production, and transmission in ancient Israel and their surrounding cultures.
The Hebrew Bible is a collection of collections made up of textual materials from all periods of Israel’s history,
religion, and literature. Ancient Israelite tradition literature came into existence through a multistep process
that is still discernible by looking at literary evidence within the texts themselves.

Events

• The life of Abraham, the exodus, the wilderness wanderings, settlement in the land of

↘︎

Canaan, etc.

Oral

• The family history of Abraham’s ancestors, the wilderness wanderings

Traditions

• Early songs: Exodus 15, Judges 5, Psalm 29, etc.

↘︎
Early

• “This is the scroll of the generations of humanity” (Gen. 5:1)

Written

• “The scroll of Jashar” (Josh. 10:13; 2 Sam. 1:18)

Traditions

• “The scroll of the wars of Yahweh” (Num. 21:14)

↘︎
The Origins of the Bible From a Historical Perspective. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

28 of 109

Early

• “The scroll of the deeds of the kings of

Collections

Israel” (1 Kgs. 14:19, 29, etc.)

of Written

• “The commentary of the scroll of the kings”

Traditions

(2 Chron. 24:27)

↘︎
Proto-

• “The proverbs of Solomon

Editions

that the men of Hezekiah

of

compiled” (Prov. 25:1)

Biblical
Books

↘︎

• “The prayers of David son of
Jesse are ended” (Ps. 72:20)
• The “Mosaic” Torah (Exod. 2123 and Deut. 12-26)
• First edition of Jeremiah (Jer.
36)

TaNaK Editions of Biblical
Books

The Origins of the Bible From a Historical Perspective. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

The Scribal Origins of the Bible
We have an abundance of evidence about the status and practice of the professional scribe in the ancient
Near East. For recent scholarship, see the following:
John Walton and Brent Sandy, The Lost World of Scripture
William Schniedewind, How the Bible Became a Book
Karel van der Toorn, Scribal Culture and the Making of the Hebrew Bible
Scribes were a professional class in the ancient world who handled and created texts in a variety of ways.
They created new texts that were commissioned such as letters, receipts, and diplomatic
correspondence.
They preserved the cherished traditional literature of their culture such as poems, epic stories, ritual
texts, and cultural mythology.
They preserved the official records of their political and religious institution such as the annals of the
king’s wars and activities.

Reflection Question
Summarize what you think is most important for people to understand about the compositional process of the
Bible or about the nature of the Bible as human and divine.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

29 of 109

