Session 24: Repeated Words and Literary Design

Key Takeaways
The message of the text is bound up with its literary form, and the literary form is part of the message.
Like biblical poetry, biblical narrative is intentionally designed with an identifiable structure.
Although it might not be helpful for everyone, for some, studying the literary design of Bible passages
can be exactly what they need in their journey of reading and understanding the Bible.

God’s Covenant with Abram: Translation and Literary Design of
Genesis 12:1-3
The biblical authors use repetition to package the information of a narrative in multiple layers of
interconnection. They use the same techniques for Hebrew poetry.

8 And Elohim said to Noah and to his sons with him , saying,

9 “And I myself, behold, I set up my covenant with y’all,

and with your seed after you;
10 and with every living creature that is with you ,

the birds, the beasts, and every living creature of the land with you ;
from everything that comes out of the ark,
even every living creature of the land.
11 And I set up my covenant with y’all;

and never again will all flesh

be cut off by the waters of the flood ,

and never again will there be a flood to ruin the land .”

12 And Elohim said ,

“This is the sign of the covenant which I am giving
between me and between you
and between every living creature that is with you , for everlasting generations;
13 I give my bow in the cloud ,

and it will be for a sign of a covenant
between me and between the land;

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

78 of 109

14 and it will come about when I cloud a cloud over the land,

that it will be seen , the bow in the cloud ,
15 and I will remember my covenant,

which is between me and between you
and between every living creature of all flesh ;
and never again will the waters become a flood to ruin

all flesh .

16 And the bow is in the cloud ,

then I will see it ,
to remember the everlasting covenant
between Elohim and between every living creature,
with all flesh that is on the land.”

17 And Elohim said to Noah ,

“This is the sign of

the covenant which I have set up

between me and all flesh that is on the land.”

Genesis 9:8-17. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).
God’s speech is designed with the features of Hebrew poetry. The symmetrically paired elements illuminate
each other and deepen the significance through similarity and difference.
Sources of identity: one’s land // one’s family
Signs of blessing: great nation // great name
Signs of divine protection: blessing // curse
The final sentence is also offset by its lack of a symmetrical partner, identifying it as a climactic statement.

Literary Design of 2 Kings 4:1-7
First, let’s read the text and use color patterns to register all of the key repeated words.

Woman to Prophet Conflict: Death and Debt
a
A

a

1 Now a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried out to Elisha ,

“Your servant my husband is dead ,
b'

and you know that your servant feared Yahweh;
c

and the lender has come to take my two children to be his slaves.”

Man/Woman Dialogue: He Said She Said

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

79 of 109

a

2 And Elisha said to her,

b

B

a'

“What shall I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?”

And she said,
b'

“Your maidservant has nothing in the house except a jar of oil .”

Command: Get Empty Vessels, Pour Out Until Full
3 And he said,

“Go, request for yourself vessels from outside,
from all your neighbors,
empty vessels ;

C

do not get a few.
4 “And you shall go in and shut the door behind you and

your sons ,

and you shall pour out into all these vessels ,
and you shall set aside what is full .”

Fulfillment: Empty Vessels Poured Out Until Full
5 And she went from him and shut the door behind her and

C'

her sons ;

they were bringing to her and she was pouring .
6 And it came about when the vessels

were full ,

Man/Woman Dialogue: She Said He Said
a

and she said to her son,
b

B'

a'

“Bring near to me another vessel .”

And he said to her,
b'

“There is not another vessel .”
c

And the oil stopped.

Woman to Man of God Resolution: Life and Debt Paid
7 And she came and she told the man of God ,

A'

and he said,
“Go, sell the oil and pay your lender ,
and you and your sons can live on the rest.”

2 Kings 4:1-7. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).
The story seems like a jumble of repetition, but the main themes and the plot arc of the story are clear. The
woman’s situation changes from death and debt into life and abundance, all because she obeys the word of
the prophet. However, if the reader ponders (and memorizes) the story, reciting it and breaking it down into its
smallest literary units, the repetitions fall into a sophisticated literary arrangement.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

80 of 109

Reading in Two Dimensions
When the reader pays attention to the narrative sequence and the repetitions, it becomes clear that the story
has a symmetrical shape made up of both key words and plot/character elements (all indicated in the right
column).
The reader is invited to read the story in two dimensions (just like biblical poetry). The story can be read (1) in a
forward linear sequence and also (2) in a non-linear symmetrical sequence.

Different Ways of Reading. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

Just as in Hebrew poetry, each corresponding part of the narrative invites the reader to compare and contrast
matching scenes as though they were matching parallel lines. When the reader juxtaposes parallel scenes,
certain details become more significant.
The story moves from death (A) to life (A’) and from potential slavery (A) to freedom (A'). These are
important coordinated images drawn from the exodus narrative where death and slavery are the
opposite of life and liberation.
The key agent who turns death into life is the word of the prophet, who is called “the prophet” (A) and
“the man of God” (A’).
The word of God through the prophet creates a test of faith for the woman. Will she trust that God can
provide oil (an agricultural staple) out of nothing (B and B’)?
The woman’s home and jars change from empty (C) to full (C’) because of her trust in God’s power.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

81 of 109

This story is about how the word of God, through the prophets, can turn death into life and create abundance
out of nothing if only God’s people will trust him as creator.

Genesis 39: A Complex Example

a

1 Now Joseph had been taken down to Egypt;

b

b'

and Potiphar bought him:
c

an officer of Pharaoh,

c’

the captain (‫ )שר‬of the bodyguard,

c''

an Egyptian man (‫)איש מצרי‬

from the hand of the Ishmaelites,

a'

who had taken him down there.

a

2 And Yahweh was with Joseph ,

b

so he became a successful man (‫)איש מצליח‬.
c

And he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.

a'

3 And his master saw that Yahweh was with him

b'

and how everything that he did (‫ )כל אשר הוא עשה‬Yahweh made successful (‫ )מצליח‬in his hand .
c'

4 And Joseph found favor in his eyes (‫ )חן בעיניו‬and he attended him,

and he appointed him over his house, and everything that was his (‫ )כל יש לו‬, he gave into his
hand .

5 And it came about when he appointed him in his house and over everything that was his (

‫ )כל אשר יש לו‬,
Yahweh blessed the Egyptian’s house on account of Joseph; thus Yahweh’s blessing was upon
everything that was his (‫ )כל אשר יש לו‬, in the house and in the field.
6 So he abandoned (‫)עזב‬

everything that was his (‫ )כל אשר יש לו‬in the hand of Joseph;

and he did not know anything with him, except the food which he ate.
And Joseph was beautiful of form and beautiful of sight.

7 And it came about after these things

a

and his master’s wife lifted her eyes toward Joseph and said, “Lie with me.” 8 And he refused
and he said to his master’s wife,
b

“Behold, my master does not know, with me, what is in the house,
and everything that is his (‫ )כל אשר יש לו‬he has given into
c

b'

a'

my hand .

9 There is no one greater in the house than me,

and he has withheld nothing from me except you, because you are his wife.
And how could I do this great evil and sin against God?”

10 And it came about as she spoke to Joseph day after day,

he did not listen to her to lie with her, to be with her.

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

82 of 109

11 And it came about on this day

that he went into the house to do his work, and no man from the men of the house was there in the
house.
b

b'
a'

12 And she seized him by his garment , saying, “Lie with me!”

And he abandoned (‫)עזב‬

his garment in her hand

and fled, and went outside .

13 And it came about when she saw

that he abandoned (‫)עזב‬

his garment in her hand

and had fled outside ,

14 then she called to the men of her house

and she said to them, “Look, he has brought in a Hebrew to us to make fun of us; he came
c

in to me to lie with me, and I cried out with a great voice . 15 And when he heard that I
raised my voice and cried out, he abandoned (‫)עזב‬

his garment beside me and fled and

went outside .”
a''

16 So she rested his garment beside her until his master came to his house.
17 And she spoke to him with these words, “The Hebrew slave, whom you brought to us,

c'

came in to me to make fun of me; 18 and as I raised my voice and cried out , then he
abandoned (‫)עזב‬

his garment beside me and fled outside .”

19 And it came about when his master listened to the words of his wife,

which she spoke to him, saying, “This is what your slave did to me,” his anger burned hot.
20 And Joseph’s master took him and gave him into the house of the prison, where the king’s prisoners

were.

a

21 And Yahweh was with Joseph and extended kindness to him,

and gave him favor in the eyes (‫ )חן בעיניו‬of the captain (‫ )שר‬of the house of prison.
22 The captain (‫ )שר‬of the house of prison gave into the hand of Joseph all the prisoners in the

b

house of the prison,
and everything they were doing, he was doing (‫ )כל אשר עשים…הוא עשה‬.

b'
a'

23 The captain (‫ )שר‬of the house of prison did not see anything in his hand

in as much as Yahweh was with him , and whatever he was doing (‫ )אשר הוא עשה‬, Yahweh made it
successful (‫ )מצליח‬.

Genesis 39. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

83 of 109

The Role of the Garment in the Joseph Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible (2019).

Reflection Question
What are some pros and cons of breaking passages down according to their structures? What does it help you
see?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

84 of 109

