Session 5: The Prophet to Come: The Seams of the
Torah and Prophets

Key Takeaways
The final sentences of the Torah and the opening sentences of the Prophets (“Seam One”) anticipate a
coming Moses-like prophet who is promised but is yet to come.
The final sentences of the Prophets and the opening sentences of the Ketuvim (“Seam Two”) anticipate
a coming Elijah-like prophet who will call the people back to the Torah and restore the hearts of Israel to
Yahweh.

The Seams of the TaNaK
Seam One
The final sentences of the Torah and opening sentences of the Prophets:
Deuteronomy 34:10-12: Anticipation of a coming Moses-like prophet who was promised but never
came.
Joshua 1:1-9: God’s appointed leader Joshua, who will lead the people into the promised land, must
meditate on the Torah day and night to find success.

Seam Two
The final sentences of the Prophets and the opening sentences of the Ketuvim:
Malachi 4:4-6: Anticipation of a coming Elijah-like prophet who will call the people back to the Torah
and restore the hearts of Israel before the Day of the Lord.
Psalm 1-2: The righteous one who will be vindicated in the final judgment is one who meditates on the
Torah day and night to find success (Ps. 1). This righteous one is the future messianic king from the line
of David, who is appointed by God to rule the nations and overcome evil once and for all (Ps. 2).

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

13 of 109

TaNaK Seams: The Torah and Latter Prophets. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Structure Reveals Purpose
The seams of the TaNaK help illuminate what the authors and compilers of the Hebrew Bible intended as the
purpose of this collection of writings.
The Hebrew Bible is meditation literature that is designed to foster:
A lifetime practice of reading and pondering the meaning of these texts.
Future hope in the promised prophet who will herald the arrival of the Day of the Lord and the messianic
kingdom (Deut. 34; Mal. 4).
A covenantal way of life that creates a counterculture to the prevailing world systems (Josh. 1; Ps. 1).

Reflection Question
The seams of the TaNaK describe the kind of leader humanity really needs. What do the Torah and Prophets
say this person is like?

Class Notes: Introduction to the Hebrew Bible

14 of 109

