Session 11: Humans Formed From Dust

Key Takeaways
Humans are formed from dust and this signifies that they are from the realm of frail mortality.
The Genesis 1 waters and the Genesis 2 waters create a combined statement of Yahweh as the master
of the chaos waters—the one who can turn them into a source of life.

Genesis 2:7: Humanity Formed From Clay
There are two biblical motifs about human nature whose beginnings are rooted in the language and imagery
of Genesis 2:7: “And Yahweh formed (‫ )וייצר‬the human of dust (‫ )עפר‬from the ground.”
Is this line describing a literal creation of the first human by focusing on the material substance from which he
was made? Or is this an archetypal description that focuses on the nature and mortality of the human species
as a whole?
To answer these interpretive questions, let’s focus on the key words “formed” (yatsar) and “dust” (aphar) and
ask two questions.
1. Does the verb form commonly focus on material substance?
2. Is “formed of dust” used to describe only the human of Genesis 2, or does it include other humans as
well?

Word Study: Formed — Yatsar
Does the verb yatsar focus exclusively on the material substance of what is created? The verb appears 45
times in biblical Hebrew. And it takes a variety of direct objects, not all of which are material.
2 Kings 19:25 ESV*
Have you not heard that I made it long ago? I formed it from days of old what now I bring to pass, that you
should turn fortified cities into heaps of ruins ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Here, the word refers to a series of events providentially arrange by God (Isa. 22:11; 46:11).

Isaiah 27:11 NIV*
For this is a people without understanding; so their maker has no compassion on them, and the one who
formed them shows them no favor.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

43 of 188

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Isaiah 43:1 NIV
But now, this is what the LORD says—
he who created you, Jacob,
he who formed you Israel:
“Do not fear, for I have redeemed you; I have summoned you by name; you are mine.”
The entire nation of Israel was formed and made by Yahweh (Isa. 29:16; 43:7, 10, 21; 44:21, 24; Ps. 95:5).

Isaiah 45:6-7 NIV*
I am Yahweh, and there is no other.
I form the light and create darkness,
I bring good and create bad;
I, the LORD, do all these things.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Here, the word is used for metaphorical descriptions of historical events of abundance and peace or war
and defeat (Jer. 18:1-10).

Isaiah 45:18 NIV*
For this is what the LORD says—he who created the heavens, he is God; he who formed the land, and made
it; he founded it; he did not create it to be empty, but formed it to be inhabited—he says: “I am the LORD,
and there is no other.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The entire cosmos is formed by Yahweh (Jer. 18:1-10; 33:2).

Amos 4:13 NIV
He who forms the mountains, who creates the wind, and who reveals his thoughts to mankind, who turns
dawn to darkness, and treads on the heights of the earth—the LORD God Almighty is his name.
The mountains and the wind are elements within the cosmos.

Amos 7:1 NIV*
This is what the Sovereign LORD showed me: He was forming swarms of locusts after the king’s share had
been harvested and just as the late crops were coming up.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Here, the word is used to describe Yahweh’s actions on swarms of locusts.

Zechariah 12:1 NASB*

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

44 of 188

Thus declares the Lord who stretches out the heavens, lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the
breath of a human within him ...
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The breath of life that animates humans was also formed by Yahweh.

Psalm 74:16-17 NIV*
The day is yours, and yours also the night; you established the sun and moon. It was you who set all the
boundaries of the earth; you formed both summer and winter.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Summer, winter, and seasonal orders of time are formed by Yahweh.

Psalm 139:16 NIV*
Your eyes saw my unformed body; all the days you formed for me were written in your book before one of
them came to be.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

A person’s “days,” that is, the course of their lives, are formed by God.

It’s not about literal versus non-literal. The Hebrew word for “formed” can refer to the creation of a material
object, but it seems to have a broader meaning of God ordering the cosmos and providentially bringing
things to be at the right place and the right time for his purposes. That’s the pattern.

Word Study: Dust and Clay
Does dust describe the unique material substance of the first human, or is this an archetypal description of
the nature and mortality of the human creature? The words “dust” and “clay” are regularly used to describe
humanity as a whole and every human, not just the human in Genesis 2.
Genesis 3:19 NASB
By the sweat of your face you will eat bread, till you return to the ground, because from it you were taken;
for you are dust, and to dust you shall return.
Psalm 103:14 NASB
For he himself knows our form;
he is mindful that we are but dust.
Job 33:4-6 NASB*
The Spirit/Breath (‫ )רוח‬of God has made me, and the breath (‫ )נשמה‬of the Almighty gives me life. Refute
me if you can; array yourselves before me, take your stand. Behold, I belong to God like you; I too have
been pinched out of the clay.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

45 of 188

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 119:73 NASB*
Your hands made me and fashioned me;
give me understanding, that I may learn your commandments.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Job 4:19 NASB
How much more those who dwell in houses of clay (‫)חמר‬, whose foundation is in the dust (‫)עפר‬, who are
crushed before the moth!
Job 10:8-9 NASB*
Your hands fashioned and made me altogether, and would you destroy me? Remember now, that you
have made me as clay; and would you turn me into dust again?
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Isaiah 64:8 NASB*
Yet you, LORD, are our Father. We are the clay, you are the former/potter; we are all the work of your hand.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Notice that in all these texts, the language of the Eden narrative is used to describe the nature of all humanity.

Adam, Archetype, and Being Formed From Dust
“Being formed from dust is a statement about [human] essence and identity, not our substance. In this,
Adam is an archetype ... If we are all formed from dust, yet at the same time we are born of a mother
through a normal birth process, we can see that being formed from dust, while true of each of us, is not a
statement about each of our material origins. One can be born of a woman yet still be formed from dust; all
of us are. ... “Formed from dust” is not a statement of material origins for any of us, and there is no reason
to think that it is a statement of Adam’s material origins. For Adam, as for all of us, that we are formed from
dust makes a statement about our identity as mortals. Since it pertains to all of us, it is archetypal.”
Walton, John H. (2015). The Lost World of Adam and Eve: Genesis 2-3 and the Human Origins Debate. IVP
Academic: An Imprint of InterVarsity Press.

Defining “Archetype”
“Archetype” is a compound word from two Greek words.
1. Arche: first, beginning
2. Tupos: pattern
An archetype is an event, person, place, or thing that will begin a series of patterns. The function of the
archetype is that what happens in the initial instance will be in common with all later iterations of the pattern.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

46 of 188

The literal meaning of the statement that humans are formed of the dust is that humans are from the realm of
death and mortality—of non-eternal life. To have eternal life, something else needs to happen.

The Waters of Potential
Both land and water could be seen as chaotic and disorganized mortality or sources of death, but they can
also be seen as sources of life and enablers of prosperity. In this passage, we see Yahweh as the agent
through which disorganized chaos becomes organized goodness.
The Genesis 1 waters and the Genesis 2 waters form a combined statement of Yahweh as the master of the
chaos waters who can turn them into a source of life. When any story happens at a well or a spring, it’s an
Eden picture that all starts with that stream in Genesis 2.

Waters of Potential in Genesis. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Eden and the Three-Part Geography of the Land in Genesis 2:4-17
We’ve already established the existence of the waters above and below and the dry land in Genesis 1. Now we
see a more detailed geography unfold in Genesis 2:8-9.
1. Region of Eden
2. Garden in the region of Eden
3. Trees in the middle of the garden

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

47 of 188

Three-Part Geography of Eden. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Although the humans were formed in the realm of dust/non-life, they were placed in the garden with access
to the tree of life. The humans are given the chance to have eternal life, but they forfeit it. The garden of Eden
story is about an ideal never realized, not perfection lost.
The biblical story is not: The universe used to be perfect, but then two humans did something wrong that
introduced death and everything unpleasant.
The biblical story is: God created a space for his humans to partner with the divine project to spread life and
order out of the realm of chaos and non-order.

The Rivers of Genesis 2:10-14
The description of the primordial river in Genesis 2:10-14 has an intentional literary design. Each river is
described with decreasing length, imitating a spring running out over the land. Each of the names is
associated with various regions of the ancient biblical map.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

48 of 188

River

Region

People Groups and Empires

Pishon

Havilah = South and East of Canaan, the NW edge of the

Cainites, Ishmaelites,

Arabian desert

Edomites, Arabs

Gihon

Cush = Southern Egypt, the upper Nile, Ethiopia

Egyptians and Ethiopians

Hiddeqel

Assyria = The Tigris River

Assyria

Euphrates

Babylonian flood plains

Babylon

Rivers Associated with Ancient Regions. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

This Eden-sourced river prepares the reader to view each of these regions (Egypt, Jerusalem and
surroundings, and Mesopotamia) as extensions of Eden’s life-giving waters and places that are graced with
the life of Eden. This makes perfect sense of the Eden analogies applied to Canaan (Gen. 13:10), Mesopotamia
(Gen. 11:1-4), and Egypt (Gen. 13:10; 45:18, 20).

River 1: The Pishon (2:11-12)
The Pishon is given the longest description, which prepares the reader for understanding the significance of
future stories.
“Goes around the land of Havilah”: This is where Ishmael’s descendants will settle (Gen. 25:18) and
where Hagar will wander in her flight from Sarah (Gen. 16:7).
“Good gold” + “aromatic resin” + “onyx stone”: These are all associated with the symbolic Eden gifts
given to Israel in their wilderness wanderings. Gold is provided for the tabernacle. Aromatic resin (‫)בדלח‬
is mentioned in the appearance of the manna (Exod. 16:33; Num. 11:7). Onyx stones (‫ )אבן שהם‬are in the
high priest’s ephod (Exod. 25:7; 28:9).
Treasure Outside the Garden?
Is there significance in the fact that these treasures are not located in the garden, but just outside it? Does this
communicate that the garden creates value in the world but is not to be mistaken with those actual treasures?
Are we to view these treasures as signals that one is near to the garden, but that these should not be
identified with the real treasure of the garden, namely that one can be with God there? [suggestion from
Jacob Stromberg]

River 2: The Gihon (2:13)
The Gihon is associated with the land of Cush, which has multiple referents in the Hebrew Bible.
Southern Egypt (modern Ethiopia): 2 Kgs. 19:9; Esther 1:1; 8:9; Ps. 68:31; Isa. 18:1; 20:3-5; 45:14;
Ezek. 29:10; 30:4-5, 9; Nah. 3:9.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

49 of 188

The son of Ham, whose descendants are people of southern Egypt (Gen. 10:6-7). But this very Cush is
the father of Nimrod, who goes east to Mesopotamia to build the empires of Assyria and Babylon.
The name of Gihon spring/river is only elsewhere associated with the spring that supplies water to
Jerusalem and the temple (1 Chron. 32:30; 33:14), which is where Solomon was crowned king of Israel
(1 Kgs. 1:33, 38, 45).

Rivers 3 and 4: The Hideqel and Euphrates (2:14)
The Hideqel and Euphrates are associated with two Mesopotamian empires. The Tigris flows “to the east of
Assyria.” And the Euphrates is left to the reader’s imagination, which is of course supposed to bring Babylon
to mind.
“The description of the rivers has been outlined in ‘decrescendo’ form, as each successive description
becomes shorter and shorter … The same pattern is evident in Hebrew word counts, as the four river
descriptions are given in 20, 10, 8, and 4, Hebrew words successively. The second river’s description (10
words) is exactly half the length of the first (20 words), and the fourth (4 words) is half the length of the
third (8 words). The impression of this most striking feature of Gen. 2:10-14 is precisely that of a spring
welling up and dissipating as it flows out all over the land—that is, verses 11-14 demonstrate literarily what is
stated explicitly in verse 10.”
Morales, L.M. (2012). The Tabernacle Pre-Figured: Cosmic Mountain Ideology in Genesis and Exodus. Peeters
Publishers.

Eden as a Cosmic Mountain
The depiction of Eden as a high place, from which flows a river of divine life that provides life for all of the
nations, is foundational for the biblical storyline. Eden is “Heaven on Earth" in the form of a cosmic high place,
where the life of Heaven is one with Earth.
Genesis 2:10 Instructor's Translation
Now, a river went out from Eden to water the garden; and from there it separated and became four heads
…
Eden is a high enough place for a river to flow out to water various distant regions of the land.

Ezekiel 28:13-14 NASB
You were in Eden, the garden of God ... you were on the holy mountain of God.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Eden is referred to by later biblical authors as a mountain.

Exodus 24:16-18 NASB
16

The glory of the LORD rested on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days; and on the seventh

day he called to Moses from the midst of the cloud.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

17

And to the eyes of the sons of Israel the appearance

50 of 188

of the glory of the LORD was like a consuming fire on the mountain top.

18

Moses entered the midst of the

cloud as he went up to the mountain; and Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.
Exodus 25:8-9 NASB
Let them construct a sanctuary for me, that I may dwell among them. According to all that I am going to
show you, as the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of all its furniture, just so you shall construct
it.
The plans for the tabernacle, which was designed as a micro-Eden, were revealed to Moses on top of
Mount Sinai, where he encountered Yahweh in the burning tree.

Joel 2:1-3 NIV*
Blow the trumpet in Zion, sound the alarm on my holy mountain ... before them [the army] the land is like
the garden of Eden; behind them, a desert wasteland.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Isaiah 51:3 NIV
The LORD will surely comfort Zion and will look with compassion on all her ruins; he will make her deserts
like Eden, her wastelands like the garden of the LORD. Joy and gladness will be found in her, thanksgiving
and the sound of singing.
Ezekiel 36:34-35 NASB
The desolate land will be cultivated instead of being a desolation in the sight of everyone who passes by.
They will say, “This desolate land has become like the garden of Eden; and the waste, desolate and ruined
cities are fortified and inhabited.”
The Jerusalem temple, which was designed to be Heaven/Eden on earth, was built on Mount Zion, a high
hill which is constantly likened to Eden.

Psalm 46:4 NIV
There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God,
the holy place where the Most High dwells.
Psalm 48:1-2 NIV
Great is the LORD, and most worthy of praise, in the city of our God, his holy mountain. Beautiful in its
loftiness, the joy of the whole earth, like the heights of Zaphon is Mount Zion, the city of the great king.
Ezekiel 47:1-12 NIV
1

The man brought me back to the entrance to the temple, and I saw water coming out from under the

threshold of the temple toward the east (for the temple faced east). The water was coming down from
under the south side of the temple, south of the altar ...

5

He measured off another thousand, but now it

was a river that I could not cross, because the water had risen and was deep enough to swim in—a river
that no one could cross.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

6

He asked me, “Son of man, do you see this?”

51 of 188

Then he led me back to the bank of the river.
side of the river.

8

7

When I arrived there, I saw a great number of trees on each

He said to me, “This water flows toward the eastern region and goes down into the

Arabah, where it enters the Dead Sea. When it empties into the sea, the salty water there becomes fresh.
Swarms of living creatures will live wherever the river flows ...

12

9

Fruit trees of all kinds will grow on both

banks of the river. Their leaves will not wither, nor will their fruit fail. Every month they will bear fruit,
because the water from the sanctuary flows to them. Their fruit will serve for food and their leaves for
healing.”
Joel 3:18 NASB
And in that day, the mountains will drip with sweet wine,
and the hills will flow with milk,
and all the brooks of Judah will flow with water;
and a spring will go out from the house of the LORD
to water the valley of Shittim.
Revelation 21:10 NASB
And he carried me away in the Spirit to a mountain great and high, and he showed me the holy city,
Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God.
Revelation 22:1 NASB
Then he showed me a river of the water of life, clear as crystal coming from the throne of God and of the
Lamb.
The heavenly Jerusalem, that is, renewed Eden on Earth, is described as a high mountain garden-city that
flows with the river of life.

"In Genesis 2-3, Eden is not explicitly described as a mountain, but this can be best understood by a careful
reading of many biblical texts that symbolically identity Eden with Zion. Through the temple ritual on Mount
Zion, the cosmic images of Eden became an earthly reality. Genesis 2:10-14 mentions the four great rivers
that proceed from Eden and water all the earth. One of these cosmic streams is the Gihon, which appears
only elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible in reference to the main source of Jerusalem’s water … This connection
between the Gihon of Eden and of Jerusalem is not the result of fuzzy or illogical mode of thought on the
part of the biblical authors. This symbolic matching reflects Zion’s cosmic and spiritual importance … The
image of Jerusalem’s cosmic stream is no more inappropriate than similar imagery applied to Jerusalem in
Psalm 48:1-3 (“Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the entire earth, Mount Zion in the far north”) or Isaiah 2:1-4
(“Mount Zion will be raised up as the highest of all mountains on earth”). In the symbolic world of Israel’s
temple liturgies, ordinary space became sacred space, the meager water spring of the city became a
cosmic river, and the little knoll of Jerusalem became Mount Zion, the highest mountain on the earth, and
Jerusalem a peripheral city in the ancient world, became the center of the earth (Ezek. 38:12)."
Anderson, Gary (1988). “The Cosmic Mountain: Eden and Its Early Interpreters in Syriac Christianity,”
Genesis 1-3 in the History of Exegesis: Intrigue in the Garden. 192-93.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

52 of 188

​The Cosmic Mountain and the Primeval River in the Ancient Near
East
“In the ancient Near East, the union of heaven and earth was conceived as a mountain whose base was the
bottom of the earth and whose peace was the top of heaven, making it the axis mundi ... the center of the
world ... The cosmic mountain was the meeting place of the gods, the source of water and fertility ... the
meeting place of heaven and earth. The cosmic mountain motif appears in the literature and religious
rituals of Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Hittites, Canaan, and ancient Israel.”
Morales, L.M. (2012). The Tabernacle Pre-Figured: Cosmic Mountain Ideology in Genesis and Exodus. Peeters
Publishers.
“[Ancient Near Eastern temples] were the architectural embodiment of the cosmic mountain … [The]
pyramids and ziggurats were architectonic representations of the archetype of the cosmic mountain, often
decorated with portrayals of the cosmic waters and fertile trees. The connection between temples and
cosmic mountains is related to their function as links between heaven and earth, as attested by the names
of the Babylonian sanctuaries (“Mountain of the house,” “House of the Mountain of all Lands”), so that the
ziggurat was literally and symbolically a cosmic mountain.”
Morales, L.M. (2012). The Tabernacle Pre-Figured: Cosmic Mountain Ideology in Genesis and Exodus. Peeters
Publishers.

Keel, Othmar; Hallett, Timothy J. (translator) (1997). The Symbolism of the Biblical World: Ancient Near Eastern
Iconography and the Book of Psalms. Eisenbrauns.

This image is from a carving on a fountain from an Assyrian temple (8th-7th cent. B.C.). It depicts a deity
whose body is a tall forest mountain, and four primal rivers go out into the world as a gift of his own divine
life.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

53 of 188

Keel, Othmar; Hallett, Timothy J. (translator) (1997). The Symbolism of the Biblical World: Ancient Near Eastern
Iconography and the Book of Psalms. Eisenbrauns.

“A highly interesting wall painting from Mari (191) shows a rectangular space surrounded by a wall … flanked
by date palms and trees … four cherubim, and two bulls. One foot of each bull is planted on a mountaintop.
The two mountains probably indicate that the center of the court is located on a mountain. The two
fountain deities in the lower of the two smaller rectangles correspond to the two mountains. A stream with
four branches (as in Gen. 2:10) rises from the vessels held by the deities. A stylized plant grows out of the
stream. This is the place from which all life issues. In the center of this region, in the upper rectangle,
stands Ishtar, the goddess of fertility, love, and war … Her right foot is set on a lion. The king stands in
greeting before her. She appears to be presenting him with ring and staff. In any case, the picture depicts
all parts of an entire temple complex. The temple building is a broad room with a wide antechamber (cf.
172-73, 207). The anteroom and the forecourt incorporate all those features which characterize the temple
as a sphere of life. We find these features repeated—almost without exception—in the Solomonic temple
and in the description of paradise: the mountain (Ezek 28:13-16), the rivers, the trees, the cherubim. Even
the bulls are present. In the Jerusalem temple they carried the bronze sea (1 Kgs 7:25). Belief in the
presence of the living God supplied the temple forecourts with all the symbols which had already played a
role in the Ishtar temple of Mari.”
Keel, Othmar; Hallett, Timothy J. (translator) (1997). The Symbolism of the Biblical World: Ancient Near
Eastern Iconography and the Book of Psalms. Eisenbrauns.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

54 of 188

Keel, Othmar; Hallett, Timothy J. (translator) (1997). The Symbolism of the Biblical World: Ancient Near Eastern
Iconography and the Book of Psalms. Eisenbrauns.

Image of Assyrian relief found in a fountain in the Temple of Asshur (patron god of Assyria, 1800-1500 B.C.). A
combination of two river deities (four streams total), who issue from the mountain god and supply all plant life
(notice the tree of life goat motif). This image depicts Asshur as the chief of the cosmic mountain, supplying
vegetation and water to the cosmos.

Keel, Othmar; Hallett, Timothy J. (translator) (1997). The Symbolism of the Biblical World: Ancient Near Eastern
Iconography and the Book of Psalms. Eisenbrauns.

Kassite cylinder seal (14th cent. B.C.). Between forested mountain tops, the mountain god rises and provides
rivers of life and vegetation for his realm. The rain waters come from his hands, and the primeval river flows
from his skirt.

​The Design Pattern of the Primeval River
Because the garden of Eden represents the union of Heaven and Earth, its river is portrayed as the source of
all the world’s fertility and abundance. When later biblical authors portray the arrival of God’s deliverance and
restoration of Jerusalem and all creation, it is no surprise that they draw upon this river imagery.
Joel 3:18 NASB

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

55 of 188

And in that day the mountains will drip with sweet wine,
and the hills will flow with milk,
and all the brooks of Judah will flow with water;
and a spring will go out from the house of the LORD to water the valley of Shittim.
Isaiah 30:23-26 NIV
23

He will also send you rain for the seed you sow in the ground, and the food that comes from the land

will be rich and plentiful. In that day your cattle will graze in broad meadows … when the towers fall,
streams of water will flow on every high mountain and every lofty hill.

26

The moon will shine like the sun,

and the sunlight will be seven times brighter, like the light of seven full days, when the LORD binds up the
bruises of his people and heals the wounds he inflicted.
Zechariah 14:6-9 NIV
6

On that day there will be neither sunlight nor cold, frosty darkness.

7

It will be a unique day—a day known

only to the Lord—with no distinction between day and night. When evening comes, there will be light.

8

On

that day living water will flow out from Jerusalem, half of it east to the Dead Sea and half of it west to the
Mediterranean Sea, in summer and in winter.

9

The LORD will be king over the whole earth. On that day

there will be one LORD, and his name the only name.
Psalm 36:7-9 NIV
7

How priceless is your unfailing love, O God!

People take refuge in the shadow of your wings.
8

They feast on the abundance of your house;

you give them drink from your river of delights.
9

For with you is the fountain of life;

in your light we see light.
Ezekiel 47:1-12 NIV
1

The man brought me back to the entrance to the temple, and I saw water coming out from under the

threshold of the temple toward the east (for the temple faced east). The water was coming down from
under the south side of the temple, south of the altar ...

5

He measured off another thousand, but now it

was a river that I could not cross, because the water had risen and was deep enough to swim in—a river
that no one could cross.

6

He asked me, “Son of Man, do you see this?”

Then he led me back to the bank of the river.
side of the river.

8

7

When I arrived there, I saw a great number of trees on each

He said to me, “This water flows toward the eastern region and goes down into the

Arabah, where it enters the Dead Sea. When it empties into the sea, the salty water there becomes fresh.
Swarms of living creatures will live wherever the river flows ...

12

9

Fruit trees of all kinds will grow on both

banks of the river. Their leaves will not wither, nor will their fruit fail. Every month they will bear fruit,
because the water from the sanctuary flows to them. Their fruit will serve for food and their leaves for
healing.”

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

56 of 188

Reflection Question
What idea is being emphasized in Genesis 2 when God forms the human from the dust?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

57 of 188

