Session 25: Literary Design of Genesis 4

Key Takeaways
Genesis 4 develops themes introduced in previous chapters: knowing, conception, birth, grief, the
ground, and testing.
Genesis 4 also introduces new themes: the voice of the blood of the innocent, the city of blood, farmers
and shepherds, and sibling rivalry.

Macro Design of Genesis 4:1-26
Genesis 4 is broken into two large narrative panels, punctuated by three birth scenes.

Scenes

Overview

A:

“and the human knew his wife Eve, and she conceived and she gave

4:1-2: Birth Scene 1

birth…”
Two sons born:
• Cain + wordplay on son’s name
• Abel (=”vapor”)

B:

Cain murders his brother Abel

4:3-16: Narrative Panel 1

• v. 3-7: The sacrifices and Cain’s test
• v. 8-11: Cain murders his brother and dialogue with Yahweh
• v. 12-16: God’s punishment and his mercy on Cain
God’s mercy: 7x blood vengeance declared for Cain

A:

“And Cain knew his wife and she conceived and gave birth to Enoch…”

4:17-18: Birth Scene 2

• Builds a city named after his son

B:

Lemek murders a young man

4:19-24: Narrative Panel

• v. 19: Lemek’s two wives

2

• v. 20-22: Lemek’s three sons
• v. 23-24: Lemek’s murderous poem
Lemek declares 77x blood vengeance on himself

Cain and Abel: A Tale of Two Seeds. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

136 of 188

Scenes

Overview

A:

“And the human knew again his wife and she gave birth to a son…”

4:25-26: Birth Scene 3

Two sons born:
• Seth + wordplay on son’s name
• Enosh (= “humanity”)

Cain and Abel: A Tale of Two Seeds. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

“Throughout the Pentateuch, the sevenfold use of divine speech formula is commonplace, and within this
chapter the number seven is clearly significant (cf. vv 15, 24). Unusually full details about Lamek, the
seventh generation from Adam (vv 18-24), may illustrate another convention associated with biblical
genealogies, a tendency to draw attention to the seventh generation. Indeed various keywords in the
narrative appear a multiple of seven times. Within 4:1-17, ‘Abel’ and ‘brother’ occur seven times, and ‘Cain’
fourteen times. Within the whole of 2:4-4:26, ‫‘ ארץ‬earth,’ not ‘land of,’ is mentioned seven times, ‫‘ אדמה‬land’
fourteen times, and ‘God,’ ‘the Lord,’ or ‘The Lord God’ some thirty-four times, exactly matching the thirtyfive occurrences of ‘God’ in 1:1-2:3. The last verse of chap. 4, ‘At that time people began to call on the name
of the Lord,’ thus contains the seventieth mention of the deity in Genesis and the fourteenth use of the key
word ‘call’... In all these respects chapter 4 is entirely typical of the editorial techniques used throughout
Genesis, and its present form must owe much to the final editor.”
Wenham, Gordon J. (1987). Genesis 1-15 (Word Biblical Commentary). Thomas Nelson Inc.

Eve’s Many Sons: Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 4:1-2
and 4:25-26
Birth Scene #1: Eve “Creates” a Son
a 1 Now, the human knew his wife Eve ,
b

and she conceived and she gave birth to Cain (‫)קין‬
c and she said, "I have created (‫ )קניתי‬a man (in comparison) with Yahweh.”

b 2a and again she gave birth to his brother Abel ,

Birth Scene #3: God “Appoints” a Son
25 and Adam knew his wife again

and she gave birth to a son ,
and she named him " Seth (‫)שת‬," because,
“God has appointed (‫ )שת‬me another seed in place of Abel, for Cain killed him.”

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

137 of 188

26 and to Seth, to him also a son was born;

and he called his name Enosh.
then it was begun, to call on the name of Yahweh.

The Cain and Abel Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah (2020).

Observations About the Two Birth Scenes
The opening and closing birth scenes (4:1-2; 4:25-26) provide a matching frame of Eve’s pregnancy, birth, and
naming of sons. The similarities also highlight some important contrasts.
“I have created a man ...”
Eve’s words in 4:1 could be taken as a celebration of divine assistance (“with Yahweh” = “with Yahweh’s
assistance”). More likely, they are a statement of her budding arrogance: “I have created a man, alongside/in
comparison with Yahweh.” The likelihood of this interpretation is supported by many observations of the
following narrative.
Eve’s words “I have created a man ...” contain the Hebrew root ‫קנ׳׳ה‬, which appears elsewhere in the Hebrew
Bible to describe God as creator of the world (Gen. 14:19, 22), of Israel (Deut. 32:6), of people (Ps. 139:13), and
of wisdom (Prov. 8:22). Since divine procreation is often connected with this verse, and it is never used of
“acquiring” children, it’s more likely that Eve is attributing the creation of Cain to her own power and ability
(cf. the warning against attributing God’s power to oneself in , and of wisdom Deut. 8:11-18).
“With Yahweh ...”
Many translations interpret the “with” (‫ )את‬as Yahweh’s agency, meaning that Eve is attributing her pregnancy
to Yahweh (Septuagint διὰ τοῦ Θεοῦ; “with the help of the LORD” NASB; ESV; NIV). But the word is more likely
implying a comparison: “beside, in comparison with Yahweh.” This is a common use of "with." Exodus 20:23
says, “Do not make any gods alongside/in comparison with me (‫)אתי‬,” and Genesis 39:6 says, “And Potiphar
left everything in the hand of Joseph and didn’t know anything alongside/in comparison with him (‫)אתו‬.”
With this interpretation, the narrative is portraying Eve (once again) as a human who uses their God-given
abilities to create their own blessing by their own wisdom and power. Eve would then be the first of many
mothers in Genesis to try to achieve or attribute the divine blessing of children to their own plan or power.
Compare Sarai in Genesis 16:1-16, Rebekah in Genesis 27:1-46, and Leah and Rachel in Genesis 30:1-43. This
would also explain why God accepts the younger son’s offering, in order to subvert human wisdom and
power, as he does in each of the generations.
“The first woman, in her joy at giving birth to her first son, boasts of her generative power, which
approximates in her estimation to the Divine creative power. The Lord formed the first man (2:7), and I have
formed the second man. Literally, ’I have created a man with the Lord‘ = I stand together [i.e. equally] with
him in the rank of creators.”
Cassuto, U. (1961). A Commentary on the Book of Genesis (Part I): from Adam to Noah. Magnes Press.
The Contrast of Eve’s Words in 4:1 and 4:25

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

138 of 188

Eve’s words about her sons open and close the chapter (4:1 and 4:25), and they contrast each other. In
Genesis 4:1 she says, “I have created a man alongside Yahweh,” and in 4:25 she says, “God has given me a
seed, another one in the place of Abel, for Cain murdered him.” Her opening words of hubris are subverted
while her closing words accept Seth as a generous gift after the tragic loss of Abel that ironically overturned
her presumptive words. Additionally, 4:25 provides a kind of reversal of Abel’s death.
“Although Seth is not Abel, he is said to stand ‘in the place of’ the dead son in a more profound sense ...
Seth is Abel redivivus [= ‘revived’], the slain son restored to his parents. His birth is proof that the loss of the
son favored by God’s inscrutable grace is not final. The death of the beloved son, even when it is not
averted, can still be reversed.”
Levenson, Jon D. (1995). “Favor and Fratricide.” The Death and Resurrection of the Beloved Son: The
Transformation of Child Sacrifice in Judaism and Christianity. Yale University Press.

Reflection Question
Genesis 4 begins and ends with Eve giving birth to a son. Compare what Eve says in Genesis 4:1 to her words
in Genesis 4:25. What do you notice? How would you describe the differences between the two statements?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

139 of 188

