Session 29: 10 Generations From Adam to Noah

Key Takeaways
The genealogy of Genesis 5 shares some similarities with other ancient Near Eastern genealogies, but
the way that this one differs makes a profound theological statement.
Enoch is a hero in the biblical value system—not a great king or civilization builder but one who walks
with God. The naming of Noah in Genesis 5 brings many of the preceding themes together as the story
moves forward.

Ten Generations From Adam to Noah
After the humans are exiled from Eden, and after the drama that splits Adam and Eve’s family into two lines,
the narrative reboots and begins again. This time, the genealogy follows the line of Seth, with Cain’s line
having been concluded with Lemek and his sons. This genealogy has a highly schematic form, which makes
the three narrative inserts stick out.

Generation

Verse

Person

Age

1

5:1-2, 3a

Narrative Insert

930yrs

5:3-5

Adam

2

5:6-8

Seth

912yrs

3

5:9-11

Enosh

905yrs

4

5:12-14

Cainan

910yrs

5

5:15-17

Mahalalel

895yrs

6

5:18-20

Yared

962yrs

7

5:21-24

Enoch

365yrs

Ten Generations from Adam to Noah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

163 of 188

Generation

Verse

Person

5:22, 24

Narrative Insert

8

5:25-27

Methuselah

969yrs

9

5:28-31

Lemek

777yrs

5:29

Narrative Insert

5:32

Noah

10

Age

TBD…

Ten Generations from Adam to Noah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Ten Generations From Adam to Noah: Translation and Literary
Design of Genesis 5:1-32
This genealogy lists 10 generations from Adam to Noah, each one given in an identical literary form:
and __ lived __ years, and he caused the birth of [son’s name]. and __ lived __ years after he caused the birth of
[son’s name], and he caused the birth of sons and daughters, and all the days of __ were __ years, and he died.
There are three figures whose genealogical entry deviates from this form, and at precisely these three points,
we find narrative inserts that highlight significant themes in Genesis. Pay special attention to Adam, Enoch,
and Lemech/Noah.

Prologue
1 This is the scroll of the generations of Adam ;

In the day when Elohim created humanity ,
he made him as the likeness of Elohim,
male and female he created them,
and he blessed them
and he named them 'human'
in the day when they were created.

10 Generations
Adam
3 And Adam had lived one hundred and thirty years,

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

164 of 188

and he caused the birth of one
in his own likeness ,
according to his image ,
and named him Seth .
4 And the days of Adam after he caused the birth of Seth were eight hundred years,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
5 And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years,

and he died.

Seth
6 And Seth lived one hundred and five years,

and he caused the birth of Enosh.
7 And Seth lived eight hundred and seven years after he caused the birth of Enosh,

and he he caused the birth of sons and daughters,
8 and all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years,

and he died.

Enosh
9 And Enosh lived ninety years,

and he caused the birth of Cainan.
10 And Enosh lived eight hundred and fifteen years after he caused the birth of Cainan,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
11 And all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five years,

and he died.

Cainan
12 And Cainan lived seventy years,

and he caused the birth of Mahalalel.
13 And Cainan lived eight hundred and forty years after he he caused the birth of Mahalalel,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
14 And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years,

and he died.

Mahalalel
15 And Mahalalel lived sixty-five years,

and he caused the birth of Jared.
16 And Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty years after he became the father of Jared,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
17 And all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety-five years,

and he died.

Yared
18 And Yared lived one hundred and sixty-two years,

and he caused the birth of Enoch.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

165 of 188

19 And Yared lived eight hundred years after he became the father of Enoch,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
20 And all the days of Yared were nine hundred and sixty-two years,

and he died.

Enoch
21 And Enoch lived sixty-five years,

and he caused the birth of Methuselah,
22 and Enoch walked with God three hundred years

after he became the father of Methuselah,
and he caused the birth of sons and daughters,
23 and all the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years,
24 and Enoch walked with God ;

and he was not, for God took him .

Methuselah
25 And Methuselah lived one hundred and eighty-seven years,

and he became the father of Lemek,
26 and Methuselah lived seven hundred and eighty-two years after he became the father of Lemek,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
27 And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty-nine years,

and he died.

Lemek
28 And Lemek lived one hundred and eighty-two years,

and he caused the birth of a son,
29 and he called his name “Noah," saying,

"This one will give us rest from our work
and from the toil of our hands from the ground
which the Lord has cursed."
20 And Lemek lived five hundred and ninety-five years after he became the father of Noah,

and he caused the birth of sons and daughters,
31 and all the days of Lemek were seven hundred and seventy-seven years,

and he died.

Noah
32 And Noah was five hundred years old,

and Noah he caused the birth of Shem, Ham, and Japheth …

Genesis 5:1-32. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah
(2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

166 of 188

The Genealogy of Genesis 5 From an Ancient Near Eastern
Perspective
It seems very probable that the author of Genesis has drawn upon ancient Mesopotamian traditions of the
generations of humanity before the flood and strategically adapted them for his own theological and
communication purposes.
There was a widespread belief in ancient Assyria and Babylon that the most ancient roots of civilization and
kingship came from the gods from before the time of the flood. These traditions are expressed in a series of
ancient texts called The Sumerian King Lists, which are found in multiple versions (see Jacobsen, Thorkild, The
Sumerian King Lists, and VanderKam, James, Enoch and the Growth of an Apocalyptic Tradition).

The Sumerian King List Compared with Genesis 5

The Sumerian King Lists

Genesis 5

There are 10 kings from the creation of kingship to

There are 10 generations from Adam to the flood

the flood and right after the flood.

of Noah, who lives after the flood.

The first king, Alulim, is appointed by the oldest

Adam and Eve (= ‘adam, “humanity”) is appointed

gods.

as the royal image of God to rule all creation.

The final king is chosen to survive the flood.

Noah, the tenth, is chosen to survive the flood.

The 10 kings rule for hyperbolically long periods of

The 10 patriarchs live for long periods of time

time (two versions are based on WB 62 and WB
444; see Jacobsen, The Sumerian King Lists, 70-

Adam - 930 years

77).

Seth - 912 years
Enosh - 905 years

Alulim - 67,200 or 28,800

Qenan - 910 years

Alalgar - 72,000 or 36,000

Mahalalel - 895 years

Kidunnu - 72,000 or 43,200

Yared - 962 years

Alimma - 21,600 or 28,800

Enoch - 365 years

Dumuzi - 21,600 or 36,000

Methushelah - 969 years

Enmenluanna - 21,600 or 28,800

Lemek - 777 years

Enmeduranki - 36,000 or 21,000

Noah - 950 years

Enmeduranna - 72,000 or 18,000
Ubartutu - 28,000 or [NA]
Ziusudra - 36,000 or [NA]

Similarities Between the Sumerian King List and Genesis 5. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

167 of 188

The Sumerian King Lists

Genesis 5

The seventh king, Enmeduranki, is brought up into

The seventh patriarch, Enoch, does not die but is

the divine assembly and has a unique role among

translated to God’s realm because of his special

the gods.

relationship with God.

Similarities Between the Sumerian King List and Genesis 5. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

This last connection between Enoch and Enmeduranki is important and has been the focus of much
scholarship (see VanderKam, James, Enoch and the Growth of an Apocalyptic Tradition).
Enmeduranki is the seventh king who ruled in the ancient city of Sippar, and whose patron deity was
Shamash, the sun deity. Enoch is the seventh generation listed in Genesis 5, and his curiously shorter life
corresponds exactly to the days of the solar year: 365.
Enmeduranki passed on traditions of divination and techniques for discerning the will of the gods. He
received this ability because of a special experience he is said to have had.
“Shamash [the sun-god] in Ebabbarra [appointed] Enmeduranki [king of Sippar], the beloved of Anu, Enlil,
[and Ea]. Shamash and Adad [the storm-god] brought him into their assembly, they honored him, and they
set him on a large throne of gold ... they gave him the tablet of the gods ... a secret of heaven and the
underworld ... He is the learned sage, who guards the secrets of the great gods ...”
Lambert, W. G. (1967). "Enmeduranki and Related Matters". Journal of Cuneiform Studies, Vol. 21. The
University of Chicago Press.
This text from the 12th century B.C. goes on to state that Enmeduranki was the founder of the guild of
Mesopotamian diviners, who were able discern the will of the gods. He was elevated to the divine realm and
given secret knowledge of the gods, which was inscribed in texts that he then passes onto his descendants in
Nippur, Sippar, and Babylon.
In the same period of the 12th century, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, makes a public claim that he is the
descendant of Enmeduranki.
“[I am] distant heir of kingship, of seed preserved from before the flood, offspring of Enmeduranki, king of
Sippar ... who sat in the presence of Shamash and Adad, the divine judges ...”
Lambert, W. G. (1967). "Enmeduranki and Related Matters". Journal of Cuneiform Studies, Vol. 21. The
University of Chicago Press.
These traditions have a clear similarity to the traditions of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, who has a close
association with God and is “taken” into the divine realm of eternal life. However, the role of Enoch in the story
of Genesis has been strategically adapted to the theological message of the author, who is making a very
different set of claims, ones that outshine the claim of Nebuchdnezzar!

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

168 of 188

While these traditions are hinted at in Genesis 5:21-24, it is clear that there was also a larger set of ancient
traditions about Enoch as the master sage elevated to the divine realm, where he learned divine mysteries
and revealed them to his son Methuselah. These traditions are found in the texts compiled together in 1 Enoch
and 2 Enoch.
“Every indicator points to the conclusion that the author of [1 Enoch chs. 72-82] has fixed in writing a very
old state ... of Enochic lore ... By presenting the seventh biblical patriarch as the person to whom God
chose to reveal astronomical information, the writer ranks Enoch alongside other culture heroes from the
various peoples of the ancient world. There was a widespread belief in the ancient Near East, and in the
classical world, that knowledge about the sun, moon, and stars had been divulged to special individuals at
the dawn of history. And here Enoch is set among their ranks.”
VanderKam, James C. (1984). Enoch and the Growth of an Apocalyptic Tradition. Catholic Biblical
Association.

Conclusions About Genesis 5 and The Sumerian King List
It appears that the author of Genesis 5 is adapting a common Mesopotamian tradition about the 10
generations from the origins of kingship to the flood. At each step, the story launches an implicit critique of
Babylon’s claim to divine origins and offers an alternative story instead.
The gods of Babylon did not originate humanity or kingship. Rather, Yahweh, the God of Israel, created
“humanity” (‘adam) as male and female in God’s image. All humanity was made to rule. The fantastically long
reigns of the Sumerian kings were literary images of their divine nature and rule. In contrast, the long lives of
the patriarchs in Genesis 5 are all ended by death. This is part of a strategy showing that the loss of Eden and
the increasing distance and alienation from the creator results in the diminishment of life. The seventh king,
Enmeduranki, was elevated to the realm of the gods, where he became the source of secret divine knowledge
given to the elite Babylonian diviners. In contrast, the seventh patriarch of Genesis 5, Enoch, is unique for his
piety and communion with God, which results in his evasion of death and the gift of eternal life in Eden.
Genesis 5 is an Israelite version of the concepts being expressed in The Sumerian King List that claimed divine
authority for Babylon’s kings. The biblical author subverts those claims and offers a revisionist version, which
places Israel’s origins within these royal-priestly patriarchs, whose stories foreshadow the unique role that
Israel will play among the nations later on in the story.
The king and high priest will become “new Adams,” and they will restore Eden through their royal and
priestly ministries.
The priests will embody a “new Enoch,” and they will “walk with God” in the temple on behalf of Israel
and open the way to eternal life in the holy of holies.
Moses, the priests, and David will embody “new Noahs,” and they will call out to God in the midst of
divine judgment and be delivered so that they can offer intercession on behalf of others.

Adam, Seth, and the Image of God
In Genesis 5:1-3, we are shown that the promised line of the seed will be carried on through Seth, Adam and
Eve’s third son.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

169 of 188

Genesis 5:1-3 ESV*
1

This is the scroll of the generations of ’adam: In the day when God created ’adam, in the likeness of God

he made him,

2

male and female he created them, and he blessed them, and he named them ’adam in the

day when they were created.

3

And Adam had lived one hundred and thirty years, and he became the

father of a son in his own likeness, according to his image, and named him Seth.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Notice that ’adam’s relationship to God is described as “image and likeness,” and this recalls all of the meaning
and significance of Genesis 1:26-28. Now, here in Genesis 5:1-3, Seth is described as his father’s image and
likeness, on analogy to Adam’s relationship to God. The analogy illuminates two significant points for the rest
of the biblical story.

Son of God = Image of God
If Seth is the “son of Adam” and can be called the image of Adam, then ’adam too can be thought of as the
“son of God,” which becomes a synonym for “image of God.”
Flash Forward: Notice that Luke’s genealogy of Jesus is constructed on this very conviction, tracing Jesus as the
“son of God” all the way back to Adam as a “son of God” (Luke 3:23-38).
This set of ideas in Genesis 1-5 formed the template for later narratives in the Hebrew Bible that depict certain
human rulers as “new Adams,” who are given a chance to be the “image of God” and rule the world on God’s
behalf, overcoming the forces of animal-like chaos in the world.

The Unique Role of Enoch in Genesis 5
Enoch lives the shortest time span of all 10 patriarchs in Genesis 5—in fact, he is placed between the two
longest-living figures in the genealogy, Jared and Methuselah.

Verse

Person

Time

Gen 5:3

Adam

130 + 800 = 930

Gen 5:6

Seth

105 + 807 = 912

Gen 5:9

Enosh

90 + 815 = 905

Gen 5:12

Kenan

70 + 840 = 910

The Unique Role of Enoch in Genesis 5. Adapted from Hughes, Jeremy (2009). Secrets of the Times: Myth
and History in Biblical Chronology. Sheffield Academic Press. By BibleProject for Classroom: Adam to
Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

170 of 188

Verse

Person

Time

Gen 5:15

Mahalalel

65 + 830 = 895

Gen 5:18

Jared

162 + 800 = 962

Gen 5:21

Enoch

65 + 300 = 365

Gen 5:25

Methuselah

187 + 782 = 969

Gen 5:28

Lamech

182 + 595 = 777

Gen 5:32

Noah

500

Gen 7:6; 9:28

Age of Flood

600 + 350 = 950

The Unique Role of Enoch in Genesis 5. Adapted from Hughes, Jeremy (2009). Secrets of the Times: Myth
and History in Biblical Chronology. Sheffield Academic Press. By BibleProject for Classroom: Adam to
Noah (2020).

If we follow the numbers of the years for each of the patriarchs and notice when he had children, a fascinating
fact becomes clear.
All of the patriarchs who came before Enoch were still alive when he was born, and Enoch was born 622 years
after Adam and Eve’s creation according to the Masoretic Hebrew chronology in Genesis 5. This means that
among all of the patriarchs, including Adam, Enoch is singled out as the one who “walked with God” in a
unique way. There is something superior about Enoch and his relationship to God that is, apparently, not true
of his ancestors.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

171 of 188

Overlap of the Lifespans of the Patriachs. Created by Tim Mackie adapted from viz.bible for BibleProject Classroom
Adam to Noah (2020).

In Genesis 5:18-27, Enoch’s story is modeled after all the others but differs at two strategic points.

Jared

Enoch

Methuselah

Gen 5:18 and Jared lived one

Gen 5:21 and Enoch lived sixty-

Gen 5:25 and Methuselah lived

hundred and sixty-two years,

five years,

one hundred and eighty-seven
years,

and became the father of

and became the father of

and became the father of

Enoch.

Methuselah.

Lamech.

Gen 5:19 and Jared lived eight

Gen 5:22 and Enoch walked

Gen 5:26 Then Methuselah

hundred years after he became

with God three hundred years

lived seven hundred and

after he became the father of

eighty-two years after he

Methuselah,

became the father of Lamech,

and he had sons and daughters.

and he had sons and daughters.

and he had sons and daughters.

Gen 5:20 and all the days of

Gen 5:23 and all the days of

Gen 5:27 So all the days of

Jared were nine hundred and

Enoch were three hundred and

Methuselah were nine hundred

sixty-two years,

sixty-five years.

and sixty-nine years,

the father of Enoch,

How Enoch Breaks the Pattern. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

172 of 188

Jared

Enoch

Methuselah

and he died .

Gen 5:24 and Enoch walked

and he died .

with God ; and he was no
more , for God took him.

How Enoch Breaks the Pattern. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Notice how Jared and Methuselah’s “living” is in parallel with Enoch’s “walking with God.” This sets up an
analogy between life and union with God—walking with God is true life.
Notice also that Jared and Methuselah’s “death” is contrasted with Enoch’s “was not, for God took him.”
If one’s life is defined by a close union with the author of life, then Enoch’s “being taken” is not death
but transformation into a new mode of existence.
Notice also the double repetition of the phrase “Enoch walked with God.” The first statement in 5:22
makes clear that this was his pattern of life for all 300 years, while the second statement in 5:24 implies
that it was this special relationship with God that was connected to his “departure.”

Why Enoch, the Seventh from Adam?
In Hebrew, “enoch” (‫ )חנוך‬means “dedicated” (used as a verb in Deuteronomy 20:5 and 1 Kings 8:63,
both about “dedicating” a house or temple).
Enoch’s total age surely has symbolic significance: 365 years is the same as a solar calendar year.
Enoch’s piety is linked to that of Adam and Eve’s in the garden of Eden and sets a pattern for later
characters to attain.
Genesis 3:6, 8 Instructor's Translation
And [Eve] took (‫ )לקח‬from its fruit and she ate ... And [Adam and Eve] heard the voice of Yahweh walking (

‫ )מתהלך‬in the garden.
Genesis 5:22, 25 Instructor's Translation
And Enoch walked (‫ )ויתחלך‬with the-elohim ... And Enoch walked (‫ )ויתהלך‬with the-elohim, and he was not,
because Elohim took (‫ )לקח‬him.”
Enoch’s way of life embodies the communion with God that Adam and Eve experienced and forfeited in
the garden. Notice also the inversion of “taking.” Adam and Eve’s “taking” results in the loss of walking
with God, while Enoch’s walking with God results in his being “taken.”

What Does It Mean to “Walk with God”?
This phrase is used of Noah in Genesis 6:8-9. And in 1 Samuel 25:15-16, the phrase is used to refer to friendly
and close contact between people.
Genesis 6:8-9 NIV

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

173 of 188

8

But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord.

9

These are the records of the generations of Noah. Noah

was a righteous man, blameless in his time; Noah walked with God.
1 Samuel 25:14-16 NASB
14

But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying, “Behold, David sent messengers from the

wilderness to greet our master, and he scorned them.

15

Yet the men were very good to us, and we were

not insulted, nor did we miss anything as long as we walked with them, while we were in the fields.

16

They

were a wall to us both by night and by day, all the time we were with them tending the sheep.”
“[T]he meaning of the phrase ... is obvious from 1 Samuel 25:15-16, where it describes friendly everyday
conduct with regard to one’s neighbors. The [author of Genesis 5] understood the words in the sense that
Enoch stood in a direct and immediate relationship to God ... and so was entrusted with God’s plans and
intentions. This is the starting point for the significance that the figure of Enoch had in a tradition that
began early and reached its fullness only in the Apocalyptic literature.”
Westermann, Claus (1990). Genesis 1-11: Continental Commentaries. Fortress Press.
“With Elohim”
Although it is not reflected in English, the word elohim in 5:22 and 5:24 has the definite article “the” in front of
it (‫)האלהים‬. The phrase “the elohim” can be used to refer to the single deity Yahweh, but it can also be a way of
referring to spiritual beings, members of the divine council, or angels (Ps. 8:6; 82:1; 97:7; 138:1).
Notice also that in the phrase “for God took him,” the word elohim does not have the definite article (

‫)כי לקח אתו אלהים‬. In other words, Enoch walks with the elohim, and so Elohim takes him.
This distinction seems like a meaningful one: Enoch’s life was marked by friendly and intimate relations with
the beings of the spiritual realm (the elohim), and so the chief Elohim (named Yahweh later in the story) takes
him.
This was how the story was universally understood in ancient Judaism (see 1 Enoch, or 2 Enoch).
“And he walked with the elohim, and he was not, because God took him.”
In the middle of a genealogy that focuses on death as the sad curtain-closer on God’s blessing for life, Enoch’s
evasion of death in the seventh generation sticks out. He is marked as the seventh (i.e. complete) human
whose allegiance and union with God results in eternal life.
The word “took” (‫ )לקח‬is a reference back to Genesis 2:15, where God “took” the human he had created and
“rested” (wordplay on Noah’s name:‫ )וינחהו‬him in the garden. Enoch is set in analogy to the human of Genesis
2, that is, Enoch is transferred to the garden of Eden, the realm of eternal life. This is how the earliest
interpretation of the Enoch story goes, preserved in 1 Enoch chapters 24-32, in which Enoch is taken up in the
Spirit and tours the cosmos until he arrives in Eden, the mountain of God.
Notice that the phrase is repeated in 5:22 and also in 5:24, which speaks of his “removal.” This indicates that
Enoch had close relationships with the elohim during his 365 years and presumably after his relocation to
another realm.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

174 of 188

In a later story modeled after Enoch’s divine disappearance, Elijah’s departure happens in a similar way and
with similar vocabulary.
2 Kings 2:9-11 NASB
9

When they had crossed over, Elijah said to Elisha, “Ask what I shall do for you before I am taken from you.”

And Elisha said, “Please, let a double portion of your spirit be upon me.”

10

He said, “You have asked a hard

thing. Nevertheless, if you see me when I am taken from you, it shall be so for you; but if not, it shall not be
so.”

11

As they were going along and talking, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire and horses of fire,

which separated the two of them. And Elijah went up in a storm to the heavens.
The rainbow is a sign of God’s judgment and rescue.

Psalm 49:15 KJV*
But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he will take me.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The parallels between Adam and Enoch’s being “taken” to Eden where they “walk with God” and the later
design pattern of Elijah’s departure suggest that Enoch is “taken” to Eden, the cosmic mountain in the skies.
This is the primary image of “the heavens,” where God’s space and human space are one. This is how Enoch is
portrayed in Jewish literature outside the Hebrew Bible (see 1 Enoch 14, 71; 2 Enoch).
“The passage, to be sure, gives the impression of being only a brief reference to a much more extensive
tradition; it is an open question, therefore, whether much of the apocalyptic Enoch tradition is not really
very old and precedes in time (not follows) the Priestly narrative.”
von Rad, Gerhard; Trans: Marks, John H (1973). Genesis: A Commentary, Revised Edition. John Knox Press.

Noah As the Promised “Comforter” of Humanity in Genesis 5
Lemek’s anticipation of a future descendant in Genesis 5:29 who will bring an end to the curse picks up the
macro theme of humanity’s exile from Eden and the curse of death and the promise of a coming “seed” who
will overcome the snake and its work.
Every line of Lemek’s words has significant hyperlinks back to various texts in Genesis 1-3:
Genesis 5:29 NASB*
And he called his name “Noah (‫)נח‬,” saying, “This one will give us comfort (‫ )נחם‬from our work (‫ )מעשה‬and
from the painful toil (‫ )עצבון‬of our hands, from the ground (‫ )האדמה‬which the Lord has cursed (‫)אררה‬.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Noah’s name is given significant theological meaning by means of wordplay.
”Noah“ (‫ )נח‬// “rest” (‫ )נוח‬// “comfort” (‫)נחם‬

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

175 of 188

Noah’s name is spelled like the word “rest,” and it rhymes with the first two letters of the word “comfort.”

Genesis 2:15 Instructor's Translation
And Yahweh Elohim took the human and he rested him (‫ )וינחהו‬in the garden of Eden, to work it (‫ )עבד‬and to
keep it.
Genesis 3:17, 19 Instructor's Translation
Cursed is the ground (‫ )ארורה האדמה‬because of you, with painful toil (‫ )עצבון‬you will from it …until you
return to the ground (‫)האדמה‬, for from it you were taken …
Genesis 3:23 Instructor's Translation
And Yahweh Elohim sent him out from the garden of Eden to work (‫ )עבד‬the ground (‫ )האדמה‬from which he
was taken …
By means of this association, Noah’s role in the story is previewed and given a theological interpretation. His
obedient actions and his role as the surviving remnant in the generation of the flood are the ways that God is
bringing rest and comfort to his world.
Rest (‫ )נוח‬is a major theological theme in the TaNaK, as it is often used to describe the restoration of
Eden conditions on Earth as in Heaven. When God brings rest, it involves restoring a realm of order and
sacred space where God can dwell with his people (Deut. 3:20; 12:10; Josh. 1:13; 21:44; 2 Sam. 7:1-11;
1 Kings 5:18).
Comfort (‫ )נחם‬is a major theme in the Prophets, especially Isaiah, and it describes the era of restoration
when the failure of God’s people is forgiven, their exile is over, and God renews the covenant with them
in a restored Eden.
All of this points forward to Noah’s crucial act of worship and obedience as he emerges from the ark in
Genesis 8:20-22. In the narrative arc of Genesis 2-9, Noah is placed before the reader as an image of the
promised seed of Genesis 3:15.
He is the righteous seed who passes the test through obedience to God’s will and survives as a remnant
through the waters of death to offer a precious sacrifice. This qualifies him to become the new humanity at
the helm of a renewed creation that lives in a new covenant relationship with its creator. This narrative forms
the thematic template for every single story to follow in the rest of the Hebrew Bible.

The Abraham Story
Called out of Ur of the Chaldeans
Given the promise of blessing and for all nations
Fails many of his tests
Passes the ultimate test by offering a sacrifice
His sacrifice releases God’s covenant blessing to all nations

The Moses Story
Rescued in an “ark” through the waters of death

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

176 of 188

Leads Israel to offer the Passover lamb
God leads all the people through the waters to dry land
Mediates a covenant with Israel to be priests for the nations
Israel fails its test, but Moses offers himself as a sacrifice
God comes to take up residence with his people in a micro-Eden

The Story of Judah and Exile
Joshua leads the people to subdue the land of rest
The people are given rest in the land
The Israelites fail their many tests in the land and are exiled
An obedient remnant survives exile and receives a message of comfort and restoration
Restoration comes through the obedient self-sacrifice of the servant
The servant’s obedience unto death released blessing and new covenant to the nations

The Story of Jesus
A new Joshua who will lead Israel into the new creation
Jesus warns of a great flood of divine justice that is coming to Israel
Jesus offers himself as a sacrifice, suffering the flood of exile and death
Jesus’ obedience unto death leads to resurrection life and releases blessing and a new covenant for all
nations

Illustration: Preview of the Biblical Story Through Adam to Noah

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

177 of 188

Preview of the Biblical Story Through Adam to Noah. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Reflection Question
What is the difference between Enmeduranki, a hero of the Sumarian King List, and Enoch, the corresponding
character in the Genesis 5 genealogy?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

178 of 188

