Session 18: The Shrewd Talking Snake

Key Takeaways
The snake is described using the Hebrew word arum, which means “prudent, cunning, or sensible.” The
description isn’t a negative one, and the word does not necessarily indicate trickery or falsehood.
Given the ambiguous, even positive, introduction of the snake, many have interpreted Genesis 3 as
showing the snake’s initial rebellion in conjunction with the humans’ failure.

The Snake and the Woman: Translation and Literary Design of
Genesis 2:25-3:7
Naked and Unashamed
2:25 And the two

of them were naked (‫ )ערום‬, the human and his woman , and they were not

ashamed.
3:1a Now the snake was more shrewd (‫ )ערום‬than any beast of the field which Yahweh God had made.

The Dialogue
The Snake
a 3:1b And it [the snake] said to the woman ,
b "Indeed, has God said ,
c 'You shall not eat from any tree of the garden ’?"

The Woman
a 2 and the woman said to the snake ,
b " From the fruit of the trees of the garden

we may eat ;

3 but from the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden ,

God has said ,
c 'You shall not eat from it or touch it, or you will die .’"

The Snake
a 4 and the snake said to the woman ,

" You surely will not die !
b 5 For God knows
c that in the day you eat from it your eyes will be opened ,

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

99 of 188

and you will be like elohim, knowers of good and bad ."

The Act
a 6 and the woman saw that the tree

was good

for eating ,

b and that it was desirable to the eyes ,

and that the tree was desirable to make one wise ,
c and she took from its fruit and she ate ;
c' and she gave also to her husband with her, and he ate .
b' 7a and the eyes of both of them were opened ,

Naked and Ashamed
7b and they knew that they were naked (‫; )ערום‬

a' and they sewed leaves of a fig tree together and made themselves loin coverings.

Genesis 2:25-3:7. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah
(2020).

Naked and Unashamed and Shrewd
This potent narrative detail is offered to describe the new ideal state of the human creature, who is now a
unified plurality. Nakedness in the biblical world refers to a state of ultimate vulnerability. To be naked outside
of the garden ideal is to be exposed to the leering eyes of untrustworthy people and is associated with
humiliation and shame (see Isa. 20:2-4; Hos. 2:5; Amos 2:16). To be naked and unashamed is an image of pure
trust, openness, vulnerability, and safety.
“Naked and unashamed” is a kind of commentary on “the two become one flesh.” When one is truly unified
with another, there is no need for self-protection or projection of a false self.
Notice the wordplay between human nakedness (Heb. arom) and the snake’s “shrewdness” (Heb. arum). It is
precisely this characteristic of the snake that will transform the humans’ nakedness from vulnerability into
shame.

A Shrewd, Talking Snake
The character of the snake is a rich and dense narrative image with many layers of meaning. In Genesis 3:1,
the snake is described as “shrewd” or “crafty.” This Hebrew word, arum (‫)ערום‬, is morally neutral, as it can
describe the righteous and wise, like in the book of Proverbs.
Proverbs 22:3 NASB
The arum sees the evil and hides himself, but the naive go on, and are punished for it.
Proverbs 12:16 NIV
Fools show their annoyance at once, but the arum overlook an insult.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

100 of 188

Proverbs 14:15 NASB
The naive believes everything, but the arum considers his steps.
Proverbs 8:5 NIV
You who are simple, gain ormah; you who are foolish, set your hearts on it.
When the word is used of people with questionable character, the nuance of “crafty” is evident.
Psalm 83:2-3 NIV
2

See how your enemies growl,

how your foes rear their heads.
3

With ormah they conspire against your people;

they plot against those you cherish.
Job 5:12-13 NIV
12

He thwarts the plans of the arum,

so that their hands achieve no success.
13

He catches the wise in their ormah,

and the schemes of the wily are swept away.
“[The 'arum] conceal what they feel and what they know (Prov. 12:16, 23). They esteem knowledge and plan
how to use it in achieving their objectives (Prov. 13:16; 14:8, 18); they do not believe everything that they
hear (Prov. 14:15); and they know how to avoid trouble and punishment (Prov. 22:3; 27:12). In sum, they are
shrewd and calculating, willing to bend and torture the limits of acceptable behavior but not to cross the
line into illegalities. They may be unpleasant and purposely misleading in speech but are not out-and-out
liars (Josh. 9:4; 1 Sam. 23:22). They know how to read people and situations and how to turn their readings
to advantage. A keen wit and a rapier tongue are their tools.”
Zevit, Ziony (2013). What Really Happened in the Garden of Eden?. Yale University Press.
Notice also the wordplay between the snake’s introduction and its final destiny in 3:14.
Genesis 3:1 NIV
And the snake was shrewd (‫ )ערום‬more than every animal of the field (‫ )מכל חית השדה‬...
Genesis 3:14 NIV
You are cursed (‫ )ארור‬more than every beast and every animal of the field (‫ )מכל חית השדה‬...
The shrewdness of the snake is a portrait of a creature endowed with the blessing of wisdom who abuses that
power for selfish ends.
“Although it is assumed by all the English translations that ‫ ערום‬has a negative sense (‘crafty’) in Genesis 3:1,
a closer examination suggests otherwise. The description of the serpent commences with its being ‘more
prudent (arum) than all the creatures of the field’ (Genesis 3:1), and after having tempted Eve, concludes
with its bing ‘more cursed (arur) than all the creatures of the field (3:14). The two lines are nearly identical in

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

101 of 188

Hebrew, suggesting an intentional contrast between them: the cursed serpent is a negative contrast to an
initially positive shrewd serpent. Not only does ‘prudent’ make more sense of the narrative flow of events, it
also distances God from any responsibility with respect to the origin of evil. God did not make a ‘crafty’
creature; he made a wise creature. The serpent’s ‘prudence’ may even be a sign of God’s special favor
toward the serpent above the other animals. The serpent’s decision to use its prudence for evil intentions,
however, resulted in a fall from divine favor to eternal humiliation, and this offers a solution to the age-old
question of the serpent’s (and Satan’s) fall. When did the serpent rebel and fall? It ‘fell’ in Genesis 3. Thus,
Genesis 3 depicts the fall of Adam, and Eve, and the serpent.”
Postell, Seth (2011). Adam as Israel: Genesis 1-3 as the Introduction to the Torah and Tanakh. Pickwick
Publications.

Reflection Question
Genesis 3:1 tells us that “the snake is more shrewd than any beast of the field.” Does this shrewdness imply
that the snake is evil?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

102 of 188

