Session 19: Humanity Fails the Test

Key Takeaways
Humans fail by trying to make themselves gods instead of trusting God.
The humans’ failure in the garden is folly because they tried to seize from God what he had already
freely offered them.

The Dialogue Between the Snake and the Woman
In Genesis 3:1, notice how the snake first twists the divine command in Genesis 2:16-17 so that God’s
generosity (“eat from all the trees of the garden”) is portrayed as protective scarcity. His first tactic is to
undermine God’s character by creating an easy opportunity for correction.
“The serpent’s obvious inaccuracy in his rendition of God’s prohibition sounds like cunning or lack of
subtlety. In fact, it is a well-known trick of the con man to appear stupid to put others in a position of sham
superiority. Any hustler knows that she better start by losing some games and give the impression to other
that they will be easy winners.”
Lacoque, Andre (2006). The Trial of Innocence: Adam, Eve, and the Yahwist. Cascade Books.
In Genesis 3:2-3, the woman responds by correcting the snake, and she clarifies that God invited them to eat
from all of the trees except one. The snake has directed the conversation so that the single prohibition now
becomes the focus. She first provides God’s rationale for avoiding the tree—choosing to eat from it will
constitute an act of rebellious autonomy, taking into one’s own hands the wisdom and authority to discern
between good and bad.
In Genesis 3:4-5, the snake’s response is to offer an alternative interpretation of both God’s words and his
intentions. God is actually withholding an ultimate good from his creatures, preventing them from becoming
“like Elohim.”
“In Genesis 2-3, Adam and Eve’s sin is a departure from a relationship of love and trust of their creator. The
serpent offers them a fake deification; a tragic imitation of a divine nature that they already have. They are
already God’s divine image (both in Gen. 1:26–28 and also in Gen. 2.), carrying the divine breath (2:7), with
divine privileges (such as the ability to name parts of creation as God himself did on Days 1-3) and wisdom
(see esp. 2:25 where they are ‫ערומים‬: ‘naked’ or ‘shrewd’). God has already showed them the difference
between good and evil and would continue to guide them in that discernment. They are the image-idols of
the creator Yahweh God, the serpent offers them a shot at becoming only like ‘gods’ (elohim, so, cor- rectly,
the LXX). In apparent ignorance or forgetfulness of—or in rebellion against—their true identity they fall prey
to the serpent’s insinuations that their creator had deceived them (Gen. 3:1-5). The tree that should have
proved their discernment between wrongdoing and faithfulness to God, becomes instead a tree that leads

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

103 of 188

to their experience of both evil and, lingering, good. In the same way that idolaters become like what they
worship (Ps. 115:4-8; 135:15-18), so the humans become like the (leaf-clad) tree (3:7). They give up the
splendor of their creator, inclining to the voice of the creature, and are left bereft of the glory that was
theirs by rights. Their action strikes at the heart of their identity. In succumbing to the lie that they need
something they already have, they annihilate themselves, and, so, ‘after sin there is nothing for it but
death.’”
Fletcher-Louis, Crispin (2012). "2 Enoch and the New Perspective on Apocalyptic". In New Perspectives on 2
Enoch: No Longer Slavonic Only. Brill.

The Inverted Symmetry of Genesis 3:6-7

The Act
a 6 and the woman saw that the tree

was good

for eating ,

b and that it was desirable to the eyes ,

and that the tree was desirable to make one wise ,
c and she took from its fruit and she ate ;
c' and she gave also to her husband with her, and he ate .
b' 7a and the eyes of both of them were opened ,

Naked and Ashamed
7b and they knew that they were naked (‫; )ערום‬

a' and they sewed leaves of a fig tree together and made themselves loin coverings.

Genesis 2:25-3:7. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah
(2020).
What the woman sees is filled out in three steps.
1. “And she saw that [it] ... was good”: This is in deliberate contrast to God’s “seeing that it is good” seven
times over in Genesis 1:1-2:3.
2. “Desirable (‫ )תאוה‬to the eyes”: What the woman sees generates desire. She now “wants” the thing that
will kill her because she has embraced the snake’s alternate narrative. Instead of realizing her true
desire will only be fulfilled by trusting God and eating from the tree of life (see Prov. 13:12), she mistakes
the tree’s beauty for the creator it points to.
3. “Desirable (‫‘ נחמד‬to covet’) for becoming wise (‫”)שכל‬: By embracing the snake’s interpretation of the
tree, she sees the knowing of good and bad as desirable and a path to true wisdom. In reality, it is the
path of folly that will lead to death.
“Precisely at this point the author raises the issue of becoming ‘wise’: ‘And the woman saw that the tree was
also desirable for gaining wisdom’ (3:6). Thus, the temptation is not presented as a general rebellion from
God‘s authority. Rather, it is portrayed as a quest for wisdom and ‘the good’ apart from God‘s provision.”

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

104 of 188

Sailhamer, John H. (1995). The Pentateuch as Narrative: A Biblical-theological Commentary. Zondervan
Academic.
Notice that the snake was not lying about “the eyes being opened” but about what kind of enlightenment
would result. The humans become aware of their own nakedness and vulnerability with each other and hide
their bodies from one another.
Their folly and rebellion was caused by their idolatrous desire for a forbidden tree, so now the humans
become like trees, covering their bodies with leaves.

Reflection Question
The snake casts doubt on God’s goodness and generosity by implying that God is depriving humanity of good
things. Compare the snake’s words in Genesis 3:4-5 to God’s command in Genesis 2:16-17. What does God say
in his original command that shows the snake is wrong about God’s generosity?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

105 of 188

