Session 28: A Tale of Two Seeds

Key Takeaways
Lemek’s actions intensify and spread the destruction and bloodshed that began with Cain and the
snake.
Genesis 4 makes it clear that the theme of the two seeds from Genesis 3 will be an ongoing conflict.

From Cain to Seth: Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 4:1726
Birth Scene #2: Cain’s City
17 and Cain knew his wife

and she conceived, and gave birth to Enoch;
and he built a city,
and called the name of the city "Enoch (‫ • חנוך‬khanok)," accoding the name of his son.
18 and to Enoch was born Irad,

and Irad birthed Mehuyael,
and Mehuyael birthed Methushael,
and Methushael birthed Lamech.

The Murderous Lamech
a 19 and Lamech took for himself two wives:
b the name of the one was Adah ,
b' and the name of the other Zillah .

a 20 and Adah gave birth to Yabal ;
b he was the father of those who dwell in tents and have livestock .
a' 21 and his brother’s name was Yubal ;
b' he was the father of all those who play the lyre and pipe .
a 22 and Zillah , she also gave birth to Tubal-Cain ,
b the forger of all implements of bronze and iron ;
c and the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.

23 and Lamech said to his wives,

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

154 of 188

a " Adah of and Zillah , listen to my voice
b wives of Lamech, hear my speech,
a for I have killed a man for wounding me ;
a' and a boy for striking me ;
b 24 if Cain is avenged seven times,
b' then Lamech seventy-seven times."

Birth Scene #3: God “Appoints” a Son
25 and Adam knew his wife again

and she gave birth to a son ,
and she named him " Seth (‫)שת‬," because,
“God has appointed (‫ )שת‬me another seed in place of Abel, for Cain killed him.”

26 and to Seth, to him also a son was born;

and he called his name Enosh.
then it was begun, to call on the name of Yahweh.

The Cain and Abel Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah (2020).

The Murderous Lemek: 4:19-24
Lemek is the seventh generation from Adam through Cain, and his life culminates and distorts two God-given
realities in the narrative.
1. God provides the woman for the human in Genesis 2, but Lemek takes two wives for himself.
2. God provides Cain with mercy and a mark of protection, but Lemek declares his own mark of
protection.
Lemek has three sons from his two wives, and each is associated with the development of human civilization
in important ways. All three sons’ names are wordplays from two Semitic roots “water canal” (yabal) or
“tribute offering” (yobil/yubal). Each of the three sons is titled the “father” of a cultural institution. The
narrative is highlighting the origins of human civilization and its diverse institutions.

Son 1: Yabal (‫)יבל‬
Meaning of Name: “Stream, river” (see Isa. 30:25; 44:4) or “tribute, offering” (see Zephaniah 3:10) Description:
“Father of those dwelling in tents and among herds” Cultural Institution: Animal husbandry on a mass scale

Son 2: Yubal (‫)יובל‬
Meaning of Name: “Water course, canal” (see Jer. 17:8) or “tribute, offering” (see Isa. 18:7) Description: “Father
of those using the harp and the flute” Cultural Institution: Musical art

Son 3: Tubal-Cain (‫)תובל קין‬
Class Notes: Adam to Noah

155 of 188

Meaning of Name: “Tribute offering of Cain” Description: “Hammerer of those fashioning with iron and
bronze” Cultural Institution: Metallurgy
This account would have stood in contrast to Israel’s surrounding neighbors and their accounts for the origins
of animal husbandry, music, and metallurgy. These are all viewed as divine wisdom received from the gods.
“[T]he development of the arts of civilization in the ancient Near East was typically attributed to the gods.
[In Mesopotamian mythology] they were introduced to the human race by the seven divine sages (called
the apkallu). In the Myth of Inanna and Enki, the patron goddess of Uruk, attempts to procure the arts of
civilization from Enki, the lord of Eridu. Among the ninety-four ‘arts’ mentioned in the text are offices such
as kingship and priesthood; objects such as sword and quiver; actions such as running, kissing, and
lovemaking; qualities such as heroism or dishonesty; and abstractions such as understanding and
knowledge. But pertinent to this passage, the list also includes the craft of the coppersmith (along with
other crafts), the resounding lute and the art of singing, and the sheepfold.”
Walton, John H. (2001). Genesis: Zondervan Illustrated Bible Backgrounds Commentary Vol. 1. Zondervan
Academic.
“In the end, city building was a divine enterprise. Within this tradition, city building was related to, and a
part of, creation, because creation involved the establishment of the world as the Mesopotamians knew it—
not only in terms of the physical cosmos, but also including the civilized aspect of the social and economic
world. In contrast, Genesis sees city building in purely human terms.”
Walton, John H. (2001). Genesis: Zondervan Illustrated Bible Backgrounds Commentary Vol. 1. Zondervan
Academic.
“[T]he Mesopotamians believed that humankind was initially barbaric and primitive. Civilization, consisting
of cities, kingship, arts, sciences and technology, among other things, was a gift from the gods, given to
humans by the gods. Once humans received these civilizing elements from the gods, they moved beyond
their initial state of primitivism and became civilized. For many of these cultural rudiments, the creator god
and god of wisdom Enki is said to have passed them to humans, and the apkallu were often the instruments
of this transmission. The Mesopotamians spoke of these cultural components as the M’E , a term used to
quantify in concrete terms their conception of the various aspects of civilization.”
Lowry, Daniel D. (2013). Toward a Poetics of Genesis 1-11. Eisenbrauns.
Lemek’s third son’s name, Tubal-Cain, is a reference to Cain the murderer. Additionally, Tubal-Cain is
associated with metallurgy—information we are given right before his father’s murderous song infers an
ominous and dark tone to Tubal-Cain’s “metal work.” This brings to mind a sword, which is precisely the
interpretation offered in ancient Jewish tradition (see Genesis Rabbah 22:2-3).
The literary design of Genesis 4 leads the reader to view the advent of the city and metallurgy as highly
ambiguous, or even negative, developments because of their association with the murderous violence of Cain
and Lemek.
4:1-16: Cains murder of his brother is avenged seven times
4:17: Cain’s son/city Enoch is a civilization that multiplies murder
4:21-22: Lemek’s son Tubal-Cain creates a civilization that invents weapons

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

156 of 188

4:22-23: Lemek’s murder of a young man is avenged seventy-seven times

Sinai Legislation Mirrors Genesis 4:23
Genesis 4:23 NIV*
I have killed a man for wounding (‫ )פצע‬me;
and a young man for bruising me (‫)חבורה‬.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Exodus 21:23-25 Instructor's Translation
23

But if there is any injury, then you shall assign: life for life,

foot for foot,

25

24

eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,

burn for burn, wound for wound (‫)פצע‬, bruise for bruise (‫)חבורה‬.

Lemek has both exceeded the divinely ordained limit of retaliation and redefined the divine law by his own
authority. It is interesting that both Cain and Lemek’s murders and the consequences are defined in the
language of the later Sinai covenant laws.

Birth of Cain and

Cain Murders

Cain’s Family

Lemek Murders

Birth of Seth to

Abel

Abel

Line

Another

Replace Abel

4:1-2

4:3-16

4:17-18

4:19-24

4:25-26

“And the human

And Cain knew

And human again

knew Eve his wife

his wife, and she

knew his wife and

and she

conceived and

she gave birth…”

conceived and

gave birth…”

gave birth…”

Eve boasts in her

Lemek boasts in

Eve humbly

“divine” power

his “divine”

receives the gift

(4:1) to create a

authority (4:24) to

of another son

“man” (‫)איש‬

kill a “man” (‫)איש‬

(4:25)

Narrative of

Narrative of

murder and

murder and

remorse

celebration

Cain’s response is

Lemek’s response

described in

is described in

terms of Sinai

terms of Sinai

covenant law

covenant law

about cities of

about retaliation:

refuge: Deut

Exodus 21:25

Cain’s and Lemek’s Response. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

157 of 188

Birth of Cain and

Cain Murders

Cain’s Family

Lemek Murders

Birth of Seth to

Abel

Abel

Line

Another

Replace Abel

4:1-2

4:3-16

4:17-18

4:19-24

4:25-26

19:10-12
Seventy-seven
Seven times

times

Child is named in

City is named in

Child named in

relation to

relation to

relation to God

Yahweh (4:1)

humans (“the

(4:26), resulting

name of his son”

in true worship.

4:17)

Cain’s and Lemek’s Response. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

“Seventy-sevenfold [literally, ‘seventy-seven’] /—that is, seventy-seven times as much. The number,
needless to say, is not to be taken literally. Sevenfold means in perfect measure (see above, on v. 15);
seventy-sevenfold signifies in overflowing measure, more than is due, many for one.”
Cassuto, U. (1961). A Commentary on the Book of Genesis (Part I): from Adam to Noah. Magnes Press.
“While Cain, Lamech’s ancestor, would be avenged seven times over by God, Lamech takes it into his own
hands to satisfy his desire for vengeance through a seventy-sevenfold retaliation. At this point, the principle
of retributive justice is pushed to the point of becoming the caricature of itself. Moreover, there is a
profound irony in Lamech’s effrontery to refer to the divine protection of his ancestor Cain. As Lamech’s
‘immunity,’ by contrast, is at the cost of unlimited violence, he has turned the divine grace to Cain into its
ugly counterfeit ... Any trivial inconvenience is occasion for Lamech to yield to violence. What he demands
is not an eye for an eye, but a life for a wound. Lamech‘s song is the last spasm, so to speak, of Cain‘s
murder story ... bringing the horror of fratricide to its apex ... The clouds are gathering that will soon bring
about the flood. ”
LaCocque, Andre (2008). Onslaught Against Innocence: Cain, Abel, and the Yahwist. Cascade Books.
“Unlike his ancestor several generations earlier who felt the desperate need of divine protection, Lamech
feels he is his own security. He can handle any difficulty or any mistreatment quite adequately by himself. If
Cain is avenged only sevenfold, he will be avenged seventy-sevenfold. He has no scruples about taking the
law into his own hands. Lamech’s chief characteristics, in line with his irregular marriages, are not
commendable. He is not only replete with a spirit of vindictiveness, but he is also a proud man who backs
away from nobody and does not hesitate to kill anybody. Cain’s mind-set now surfaces in his great-greatgreat grandson.”
Hamilton, Victor P. (1990). The Book of Genesis (New International Commentary on the Old Testament
Series) 1-17. Eerdmans.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

158 of 188

“If Adah and Zillah watched with pride as their sons developed husbandry, music, and metalworking, they
listened with horror to their husband’s violent blood lust. Lamek’s seventy-sevenfold vengeance stands in
contrast with the law of talion which limits retaliation to exact equivalence (Exod. 21:25 “bruise for bruise,”
“hit for hit” echoes the terminology of Gen. 4:23 exactly). By placing this comment at the end of the story
of Cain, the editor suggests that all his descendants are under judgment and hints at the disaster to come.”
Wenham, Gordon J. (1987). Genesis 1-15 (Word Biblical Commentary). Thomas Nelson Inc.

Hope Reborn: The Arrival of Seth in Genesis 4:25-26
Genesis 4:25-26 Instructor's Translation
25

And Adam knew his wife again, and she gave birth to a son, and she named him “Seth (‫)שת‬,” because,

“God has appointed (‫ )שת‬me another seed in place of Abel, for Cain killed him.”

26

And to Seth, to him also

a son was born; and he called his name Enosh. Then it was begun, to call on the name of Yahweh.
In contrast to Cain’s birth, which Eve attributed to her own creative powers (Gen. 4:1-2), and in contrast to
Cain, who uses his son’s name to memorialize his own city (Gen. 4:17), this chapter ends with a chastened Eve,
who now highlights God’s generosity in giving her another son to replace the murdered Abel (and, less
directly, the exiled Cain).
This portrait of Seth as the substitute for Abel is crucial. It begins a design pattern motif that echoes from
Genesis through 2 Kings.
Seth is “in place of” (‫ )תחת‬Abel
The ram is offering “in place of” (‫ )תחת‬Isaac
Judah offers himself ”in place of” (‫ )תחת‬Benjamin
In contrast to Cain’s son Enoch, Seth now has a son, Enosh (‫)אנוש‬, which means, “human.” It’s as if humanity
gets a fresh start with Seth, which helps us understand the bright note on which this dark chapter concludes:
the worship of Yahweh.
“The statement [is] saying that the worship of Yahweh began in the primeval time. With the birth of Seth,
the child of promise, people started to invoke him. Beforehand, to be sure, Yahweh has intervened in the
course of history ... But, properly speaking, no one had called on the name of God, that is, until the end of
Genesis 4 there is no prayer ... Until Seth, it is here intimated, the humans had taken intercourse with the
deity for granted ... With the advent of Seth, however, something has changed in the relationship ... the
name of God can now be called upon for help and to honor ... What is of primordial import here is that ...
the invocation of Yahweh preceded the advent of the people of Israel. It is a theological statement: Yahweh
is the God of the whole of humanity ... Abram did not inaugurate the calling upon of Yahweh’s name ...
rather, Abram’s conversion led him to join a chorus that began with Seth.”
LaCocque, Andre (2008). Onslaught Against Innocence: Cain, Abel, and the Yahwist. Cascade Books.

Illustration: Continuing the Tale of Two Seeds
Class Notes: Adam to Noah

159 of 188

Tale of Two Seeds Continued. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).

Comparing Cain’s Line and Seth’s Line
The two lines of Cain (Gen. 4:17-24) and Seth (Gen. 4:25-26, 5:1-32) are juxtaposed so that the reader notices
all sorts of comparisons and contrasts.

Cain’s Line

Seth’s Line

4:17-24

4:25-26, 5:1-32

1. Adam (‫)אדם‬

0. God (+ repeat of 1:26-27)
1. Adam (‫)אדם‬

2. Cain (‫)קין‬

2. Seth (‫)שת‬

3. Enoch (‫)חנוך‬

3. Enosh (‫“ = אנוש‬humanity”)

4. Irad (‫)עירד‬

4. Kenan (‫)קינן‬

Cain’s Line and Seth’s Line. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

160 of 188

Cain’s Line

Seth’s Line

4:17-24

4:25-26, 5:1-32

5. Mehuya’el (‫)מחויאל‬

5. Mehalelel (‫)מהללאל‬

6. Methusha’el (‫)מתושאל‬

6. Yered (‫)ירד‬

7. Lemek I (‫[ )למך‬70 x 7]

7. Enoch (‫“ = חנוך‬dedicated”)

8. Yabal

8. Methuselah (‫)מתושלח‬

9. Yubal

9. Lemek II (‫[ )למך‬700 + 70 + 7yrs]

10. Tubal-Cain [= “Produce of Cain”]

10. Noah (‫)נח‬

Three sons

Three sons - Shem, Ham, Japheth

Lemek’s perversion (4:23-24)

Lemek’s promise (5:29)

Adam had 1 wife // Lemek has 2 wives

Noah (‫ )נח‬will bring comfort (‫ )נחם‬to our “painful
toil” (‫ )עצבון‬and the cursed ground (‫אררה‬/‫➞ )אדמה‬

Cain: divine blessing of 7x venegeance // Lemek:

3:17

human curse of 7x + 70x vengeance
Lemek lives 7 + 70 + 700 years.

Blessing becomes Curse

Curse becomes Blessing

Cain’s Line and Seth’s Line. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

“The effect of the whole of Genesis 5, is to replace Cain with Seth as the second father of humanity. The
human race continued only through the lineage of Adam’s third son, Seth, the descendants of his first son
Cain presumably having perished in the flood ... Here we see a programmatic principle laid out ... as the
people of Israel and its royal and priestly dynasties are not derived from their families first-born, but from
late-born sons. The people are descended not from Ishmael and Esau, but from Isaac and Jacob. The royal
line is derived from Jacob’s fourth son, Judah, and from David and Solomon, none of whom are the firstborn. The priesthood is derived from Levi, Jacob’s third son, and the priest’s third and fourth sons Ithamar
and Eleazar, not Nadab and Abihu the first and second born. In Cain and Seth, we can see that the same
principle pertains not only within the chosen family, but with universal humanity as a whole: humankind is
descended not from Cain but from Seth, not from Adam and Eve’s first son, but from their third ... In that
case, Abel’s death in the field is not final or irreversible, for upon it follows his assumption of the exalted
status of ancestor of all who live. God’s favor at the altar leads to more than fratricide. It leads also to the
survival of the human family through the younger brother.”

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

161 of 188

Levenson, Jon D. (1995). The Death and Resurrection of the Beloved Son: The Transformation of Child
Sacrifice in Judaism and Christianity. Yale University Press.
“The genealogy in Genesis 4:17-24 leading from Cain to Lamech, from one murderer to another, is by
contrast an anti-genealogy, which expresses through the list the whole sequence of human decisions
undertaken outside of the order established by God at creation. The use of the genealogy to link two
murderers is highly ironic. Their actions in bringing life to an end contradict the whole logic of the
genealogies, which normally record the orderly continuation of life from one generation to the next. The
irony, in turn, highlights a fundamental theme in Genesis, that human sin stands in profound contradiction
to the created order of God. Cain’s and Lamech’s murders subvert the very nature of genealogical
succession, which rests on the command to be fruitful and multiply in Genesis 1:28. Significantly, the
genealogy of Seth, which reasserts the created order, appears after the subversion of the genealogical
order in chapter 4 so that the created order has the last word.”
Robinson, Robert B. (1986). "The Literary Function of Genealogies in Genesis". The Catholic Biblical Quarterly
Vol. 48 (4). Catholic Biblical Association.
“[C]omparing the two genealogies in Gen 4 and Gen 5... confirms our suspicions regarding the negative
light cast on the first in contrast to the positive of the second. [T]he final editor juxtaposes these two
genealogies for communicative effect... a “genealogical doublet”: Whatever the origins of the two lines . ..
the texts of Genesis 4 and 5, and particularly the recurrent similarity in names, invite an examination of their
relationship. The text attaches Cain’s Enoch to a city but Seth’s Enoch moves beyond human culture to the
world of the divine. . . Both Lamechs play pivotal roles in their lines and both have statements recorded in
the text. But Cain’s Lamech utters a cry of vengeance and with that terminates his line; while Seth’s Lamech
expresses the hope for a better life for his descendants, and with that introduces the offspring who will
continue his line and play a role in trying to fulfill his wish."
Lowry, Daniel D. (2013). Toward a Poetics of Genesis 1-11. Eisenbrauns.

Reflection Question
Compare and contrast Cain with Lamech. How are their actions similar? Describe the trajectory the story
takes while following Cain’s descendants.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

162 of 188

