Session 2: Genesis 2-5 as the Introduction to the
Hebrew Bible

Key Takeaways
Jesus’ Bible was a three-part collection of scrolls called the TaNaK. (TaNaK is a designation for the
Hebrew Bible taken from the first letter of its three major sections. T stands for Torah, which is Hebrew
for “instruction”; N is for Nevi'im, meaning “prophets”; and K is for Ketuvim, meaning “writings.”)
The Bible is like a patchwork quilt where each piece plays a part in the unified work.

The TaNaK as a Composite Unity
The Hebrew Bible is a set of ancient Israelite scrolls that were formed into an editorial unity over the course of
their composition and collection. The three-part macro design dates to somewhere in the 3rd-2nd century
B.C. This order is preserved in modern Jewish tradition and is well attested in Second Temple Jewish texts and
the New Testament.

Sections

Scrolls

Torah

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy

(The Law)

Nevi’im

Former Prophets: Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings

(The
Prophets)

Latter Prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadaiah, Jonah, Micah,
Nahum, Habakkuk, Zaphaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi

Ketuvim

Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Songs, Ecclesiastes, Lementations, Esther [The

(The

Megillot], Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Chronicles

Writings)

Three-Part Collection of the Hebrew Bible. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to
Noah (2020).

Jesus Refers to This Three-Part Design

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

7 of 188

When Jesus alludes to the order of the Hebrew Bible, he assumes a three-part design, which agrees with other
contemporary Jewish authors who allude to the ordered sections.
Luke 24:44 NIV
This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the
Torah of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms.
The “blessed one” of Psalm 1 is portrayed as the ideal Joshua seen in Joshua 1:7-8, “one who meditates on
the Torah day and night,” which results in success and a prosperous way.

Luke 11:51 NIV
Therefore, this generation will be held responsible for the blood of all the prophets that has been shed
since the beginning of the world, from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who was killed between
the altar and the sanctuary.
Abel was murdered by Cain in Genesis 4, and Zechariah son of Jehoiadah was murdered by Joash in
2 Chronicles 24, which corresponds to the TaNaK order.

Other published texts in this time period also refer to the three-part design of the TaNaK.
“Many great teachings have been given to us through the Law [Torah], and the Prophets [Nevi’im], and the
others that follow them [Ketuvim] ... So my grandfather Yeshua devoted himself especially to the reading of
the Law and the Prophets and the other scrolls of our Ancestors.”
Prologue to the Wisdom of Ben Sirach
“The scrolls of Moses, the words of the prophets, and of David.”
Dead Sea Scrolls (4QMMT)
“The laws and the oracles given by inspiration through the prophets and the Psalms, and the other scrolls
whereby knowledge and piety are increased and completed.”
Philo of Alexandria (De Vita Contempletiva, 25)

The Editorial Design of the TaNaK
The three-part shape of the Hebrew Bible isn’t simply a matter of arrangement. Rather, the books themselves
have been designed to fit into this particular shape. If you look at the editorial seams of the major sections
(remember the technology was papyrus or leather scrolls), you’ll find intentional design clues at the
beginning and ending of these sections.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

8 of 188

Tanak Editorial Design. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Seam 1: The Final Sentences of the Torah and the Opening Sentences of the Nevi’im
Deuteronomy 34:10-12: Anticipation of a coming Moses-like prophet who was promised but never came.
Joshua 1:1-9: God’s appointed leader, Joshua, who will lead the people into the promised land, must
meditate on the Torah day and night to find success.

Seam 2: The Final Sentences of the Nevi’im and the Opening Sentences of the Ketuvim
Malachi 4:4-6: Anticipation of a coming Elijah-like prophet who will call the people back to the Torah
and restore the hearts of Israel before the Day of the Lord.
Psalms 1-2: The righteous one who will be vindicated in the final judgment is one who meditates on the
Torah day and night to find success (Ps. 1). This righteous one is the future messianic king from the line
of David, who is appointed by God to rule the nations and overcome evil once and for all (Ps. 2).

The Hebrew Bible as a Family Quilt
A quilt is made of many pre-existing materials and consists of individual pieces (like the Eden story or the
Abraham stories), collections of pieces (like the laws at Mount Sinai or the Psalms), or entire images (like the
books of Ruth or Esther). These earlier materials can be incorporated into the collection as they stand, or they
can be editorially reshaped to fit the new context. But, and this is the key point, it is this new overall context of
the final quilt that gives each individual piece its meaning when viewed in light of the whole. Regardless of
the meaning of any individual piece, the entire quilt is now the proper frame of reference for understanding
every smaller piece.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

9 of 188

In the case of Genesis 2-5 (the focus of this class), we must ask ourselves at every step of our reading: What is
the meaning that is intended by the authors who formed the final shape of the TaNaK, as far as we can discern
it? For the authors, Genesis 1-11 formed an introduction to the entire TaNaK. In this section of Scripture, we
find the basic themes, vocabulary, and plot elements that will be developed throughout the rest of the
collection.

Reflection Question
How is the Hebrew Bible like a family quilt? What might the patches, or the whole quilt, represent?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

10 of 188

