Session 24: Key Takeaways From the Eden Story

Key Takeaways
The Hebrew words for help and skin look very similar. It’s as if the animal skin that God provides to cover
the humans is a diminished form of God’s ‘ezer (help) in the broken reality after the failure of the
humans.
God responds to human failure with mercy. God continues to work with humanity even in the midst of
brokenness.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 3:20-21
Eve’s Name and a Divine Mercy
20 and the human called the name of his woman "Hawwah",

"for she is the mother of all living (‫)חי‬

21 and God made for human and his wife, garments of skin,

and he clothed them.

Genesis 3:20-24. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).
These two verses seem randomly placed here, but they are actually strategically located in order to create a
frame around the entire fail narrative of Genesis 3:1-19 by matching and inverting multiple elements in
Genesis 2:18-25.

Genesis 2:18-25

Genesis 3:1-19

Genesis 3:20-21

1. Adam names the woman “woman”

The snake, the

1. Adam names the woman “Hawwah”

woman, and the
2. God provides woman as an ‘ezer )‫(עזר‬

man

2. The deception of the ‘ezer )‫(עזר‬
creates the need for “skin” )‫(עור‬

Comparing Genesis 2:18-25 to Genesis 3:20-21. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam
to Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

131 of 188

Genesis 2:18-25

Genesis 3:1-19

Genesis 3:20-21

3. They are naked and not ashamed

3. Human nakedness is covered by God

4. Humanity at peace with the animals

4. An animal is killed to “clothe”
humans

Comparing Genesis 2:18-25 to Genesis 3:20-21. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam
to Noah (2020).

After the failure of the man and woman, the story concludes with these two short details. The naming of the
woman in 2:23 is now furthered by a dual wordplay.
1. She is named “Eve” (Heb. hawwah / ‫ חוה‬for she is the mother of all “life” (Heb. hay / ‫)חי‬.
2. The semitic root hawwah also means “snake” in Jewish Aramaic (‫ )חויה‬and Syriac (see KohlerBaumgartner, Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament, 296).
God provides “garments of skin (‫ ”)עור‬to replace the “leaf garments” the humans made to hide their
nakedness from each other. This last word (“garments of skin”) is a wordplay on God’s provision of the woman
as a deliverance of help for the man (‫)עזר‬.
The provision of garments for the humans happens before their expulsion from Eden and is portrayed as an
act of divine generosity in the midst of judgment. Now that the humans have made the irreversible decision,
God accommodates their non-ideal situation and provides them with a gift. And this “garment” (Heb. ketonet /

‫ )כתנת‬is not just a tunic but a robe (Joseph’s technicolor dream coat in Gen. 37:3 is a ketonet as well).
This scene also plants the seed of a key motif in the book of Genesis: deception and garments. In the Eden
story, the snake’s deception of the naked woman results in her need for a garment. Let’s look at this motif in
later biblical stories.
Rebekah and Jacob trick Isaac with deceptive garments and food (Gen. 27:15-17).
Joseph’s brothers deceive Jacob with a bloodied garment (Gen. 37:31-33).
Tamar deceives Judah by “covering” herself with deceptive garments (Gen. 38:14).
Joseph is elevated from prison and gets new garments (Gen. 41:42) that disguise him from his brothers
so that he can deceptively get them to tell the truth (Gen. 42:8; 43:1-44:34).
This provision of garments for the one God exiles from Eden is also reversed in Israel’s priesthood. They are
also assigned “divine garments (Heb. ketonet)” by God which will cover their nakedness when they work at the
altar or enter the tabernacle (Exod. 21:26; 28:39-43).

Conclusion of the Eden Narrative: Translation and Literary Design
of Genesis 3:22-24
Exile From Eden

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

132 of 188

22 And Yahweh God said,

"Look, the human has become like one of us, knowing good and bad ,
and now so that he won’t send out his hand and take also from the tree of

life (‫ )חיים‬,

and eat and live (‫ )חי‬forever ..."

23 and Yahweh God sent him out from the garden

to work the ground from which he was taken
24a and he banished the human

24b and he made to dwell at the east of the garden of Eden

cherubim and the flame of the whirling sword to guard way to the tree of

life (‫ )חיים‬.

Genesis 3:20-24. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).
This concluding unit represents the inversion of the Eden story’s introduction.
God created the human and placed him in the garden. > The human is banished from the garden.
God causes the tree of life and knowing good and bad to grow. > Humans are cut off from them.
Before the garden there was no human to work the ground. > The human works the ground outside
Eden.
Humanity was made mortal so that by obeying God they could remain in the garden and receive the gift
of eternal life. > Now they are cut off and sent into the land of mortality.
Humanity was directed to guard/keep the garden. > Humanity is now guarded/kept from the garden.
The story’s final line about the cherubim and “flame of the whirling sword” is a condensed hint that sends the
reader forward to the design of the tabernacle and temple and into the prophetic visions of the divine throne
room. Cherubim flank the ark of the covenant on the holy of holies (Exod. 25:17-22). In the temple, cherubim
are designed on the walls of the holy place and on the front doors into the temple (1 Kgs. 6:29-32). The
“sword” will appear in the hand of the angel of Yahweh again when David goes to the hilltop in Jerusalem,
which at the time was the threshing floor of Ornan (1 Chron. 21:16).

Key Takeaways From the Eden Story in Genesis 2:4-3:24
God’s ideal for creation is for his transcendent and eternal life-giving presence (Heaven) to be united with our
material creation (Earth) so that it is transformed into eternal life.
Eden is the key biblical image of the place where Heaven and Earth are one. It is both Heaven and Earth
simultaneously, as are the tabernacle and the Jerusalem temple. This is why garden and temple imagery
pervades Heaven imagery throughout the Bible.
Outside of Eden, the reality of Heaven on Earth is hidden from us most of the time. However, we experience
its gifts of blessing in every baby’s birth, in every abundant harvest, in every good meal, in every experience
of beauty and laughter, and in every feeling of intimacy and communion with family or someone we love.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

133 of 188

These gifts of Eden are small tastes of ultimate goodness that pervade our world and point humanity to their
creator if they have eyes to see.
The story of Genesis 3 is more about “the fail” than “the fall.” It is about a misguided attempt to seize divine
wisdom.
“Wisdom is good, and we can safely assume that God did not intend to withhold it from humanity. But true
wisdom must be acquired through a process, generally from instruction by those who are wise. The fall is
defined by the fact that Adam and Eve acquired wisdom illegitimately (Gen. 3:22), thus trying to take God’s
role for themselves rather than eventually joining God in his role as they were taught wisdom and became
the fully functional vice-regents of God involved in the process of bringing order. If humans are to work
alongside of God in extending order (‘subdue’ and ‘rule’ [Gen. 1:28]), they need to attain wisdom, but as
endowment from God, not by seizing it for autonomous use. If ... from the start people were mortal, and
pain and suffering were already a part of a not yet fully ordered cosmos, we cannot think of death and
suffering as having been foisted on us by Adam and Eve’s malfeasance. ... Instead, we can have a much
more charitable attitude toward Adam and Eve when we realize that it is not that they initiated a situation
that was not already there; it is that they failed to achieve a solution ... that was in their reach. Their choices
resulted in their failure to acquire relief on our behalf. Their failure meant that we are doomed to death and
a disordered world full of sin. These are profoundly significant consequences for what was a serious
offense. In contrast, Christ was able to achieve the desired result where Adam and Eve failed. We are all
doomed to die because when they sinned we lost access to the tree of life. We are therefore subject to
death because of sin. Christ succeeded and actually provided the remedy to sin and death. Some would
follow this same line of reasoning to suggest that what we call original sin is the result of our ancestors
“pulling out of the program” prematurely. James Gaffney identifies these approaches as involving a view
that our human condition is underdeveloped, failing to achieve the intended goal because we wanted to do
it our way—’not paradise lost, but, as it were, paradise ungained.’”
Walton, John (2015). The Lost World of Adam and Eve: Genesis 2-3 and the Human Origins Debate. IVP
Academic.
Evil is a semi-personal presence that causes doubt about the creator’s goodness and intentions, and it
compels humans to declare themselves to be the author of both their own identity and of good and evil. This
results in a tragic irony where humans give their divine dignity over to creation with its animal-like appetite for
survival and control.
The story sets up the main plot conflict that drives the rest of the biblical story: God wanted to rule creation
through his human images, but now they are in rebellion and causing chaos and disorder in God’s good
world. So what’s the solution? We need a new kind of human who can do two things we cannot do for
ourselves: Deal with the problem humanity has generated, and restore humanity back to its ideal role.

Reflection Question
God doesn’t stop working in and with humanity after he banishes them from the garden. What does this show
us about God’s heart? What should we expect from God as we continue reading Genesis and the rest of the
Bible?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

134 of 188

