Session 12: Garden Imagery in the Ancient Near East

Key Takeaways
Garden imagery is how the biblical authors talk about the space where Heaven and Earth overlap.
Garden imagery is also used in other ancient Near Eastern iconography to represent divine space,
similar to but also different from the biblical concept.

Word Study: Delight/Eden — Eden (‫)עדן‬
The word “eden” (‫ )עדן‬is used in two overlapping ways in the Hebrew Bible.

Eden as Luxuriance or Delight
2 Samuel 1:24 NKJV*
O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, Who clothed you in scarlet with luxuries (lit. “edens”) who put
ornaments of gold on your apparel.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 36:7-8 NIV
How priceless is your unfailing love, O God!
People take refuge in the shadow of your wings.
They feast on the abundance of your house;
you give them drink from your river of delights (lit. “edens”).
Jeremiah 51:34 NIV
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has devoured us, he has thrown us into confusion, he has made us an
empty jar. Like a serpent he has swallowed us and filled his stomach with our delicacies (lit. “edens”), and
then has spewed us out.

Eden as the Cosmic Meeting of Heaven and Earth
The cosmic land called “Delight/Eden” is consistently referred back to in the Hebrew Bible as a meeting place
of Heaven and Earth, which is the source of all life and abundance outside of Eden.
Isaiah 51:3 NIV
The LORD will surely comfort Zion and will look with compassion on all her ruins; he will make her deserts
like Eden her wastelands like the garden of the LORD. Joy and gladness will be found in her, thanksgiving
and the sound of singing.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

58 of 188

Ezekiel 31:3-4, 9 NIV
3

Consider Assyria once a cedar in Lebanon, with beautiful branches overshadowing the forest; it towered

on high, its top above the thick foliage.

4

The waters nourished it, deep springs made it grow tall; their

streams flowed all around its base and sent their channels to all the trees of the field ...

9

I made it beautiful

with abundant branches, the envy of all the trees of Eden in the garden of God.
Ezekiel 36:35 NIV
They will say, “This land that was laid waste has become like the garden of Eden; the cities that were lying
in ruins, desolate and destroyed, are now fortified and inhabited.”
Ezekiel 28:13-14 NASB
You were in Eden, the garden of God ... You were on the holy mountain of God; you walked in the midst of
the stones of fire.
Psalm 46:1-7 NASB
1

God is our refuge and strength,

a very present help in trouble.
2

Therefore we will not fear, though the earth should change

and though the mountains slip into the heart of the sea;
3

though its waters roar and foam,

though the mountains quake at its swelling pride.
Selah.
4

There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God,

the holy dwelling places of the Most High.
5

God is in the midst of her, she will not be moved;

God will help her when morning dawns.
6

The nations made an uproar, the kingdoms tottered;

he raised his voice, the earth melted.
7

The LORD of hosts is with us;

The God of Jacob is our stronghold.
Selah.

Images of Heaven on Earth

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

59 of 188

Garden of Eden Pattern. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

God, the high place that sources the river, and the city up on high all become mapped onto each other as
images pointing to a greater reality.

Garden as Paradise
200 years before Jesus, Hebrew scholars translated their Hebrew Bible into Greek. This version, called the
Septuagint, translated the word “gan” to “paradeisos,” which is where the English word “paradise” comes
from.
Luke 23:42-44 NASB
42

And he was saying, “Jesus, remember me when you come in your kingdom!”

“Truly I say to you, today you shall be with me in Paradise.”

44

43

And he said to him,

It was now about the sixth hour, and

darkness fell over the whole land until the ninth hour.”
Revelation 21:1-4 NASB
1

Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth passed away, and there is

no longer any sea.

2

And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, made

ready as a bride adorned for her husband.

3

And I heard a loud voice from the throne, saying, “Behold, the

tabernacle of God is among men, and he will dwell among them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself will be among them,

4

and he will wipe away every tear from their eyes; and there will no longer be

any death; there will no longer be any mourning, or crying, or pain; the first things have passed away.”

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

60 of 188

Revelation 22:1-2 NASB
1

Then he showed me a river of the water of life, clear as crystal, coming from the throne of God and of

the Lamb,

2

in the middle of its street. On either side of the river was the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of

fruit, yielding its fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.

Word Study: Planted in the East/of Old — Qedem (‫)קדם‬
The word qedem can be used geographically (to mean “east”) or temporally (to mean “before”). The use is
picked up and elaborated in Genesis 3:24 and 4:16.
Genesis 3:24 NASB
So he drove the man out; and at the east (‫ )מקדם‬of the garden of Eden, he stationed the cherubim and the
flaming sword which turned every direction to guard the way to the tree of life.
Genesis 4:16 NASB
Then Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and settled in the land of Nod, east (‫ )קדמת‬of Eden.
This geographical use of Eden is clear, but the question is whether the word “miqeddem” has a double
meaning in Genesis 2:8, because the temporal use of this word is very common.

Isaiah 45:21 NIV
Declare what is to be, present it—let them take counsel together. Who foretold this long ago, who declared
it from the distant past (‫ ?)מקדם‬Was it not I, the LORD? And there is no God apart from me, a righteous God
and a Savior; there is none but me.
Micah 5:2 NIV
But you, Bethlehem Ephrathah, though you are small among the clans of Judah, out of you will come for me
one who will be ruler over Israel, whose origins are from of old (‫)מקדם‬, from ancient times.
Habakkuk 1:12 NIV*
LORD, are you not from antiquity (‫ ?)מקדם‬My God, my Holy One, you will never die. You, LORD, have
appointed them to execute judgment; you, my Rock, have ordained them to punish.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Psalm 77:11-12 NIV*
11

I will remember the deeds of the LORD; yes, I will remember your miracles of long ago (‫)מקדם‬.

12

I will

consider all your works and meditate on all your mighty deeds.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

In the earliest history of interpretation, the word was understood both ways.
1. Geographical: Old Greek (κατα ἀνατολας, “from eastward”)

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

61 of 188

2. Temporal: Latin Vulgate (a principio, “from the beginning”), and early Septuagint revisers (Aquila

ἀπο ἀρχηθεν, Symmachus ἐκ πρωτης, Theodotian ἐν πρωτοις), and all of the Aramaic Targums (Neofiti,
Pseudo-Jonathan)
“’Before the creation of the world a garden had been planted by the Memra of the Lord God from Eden for
the righteous’—The view expressed here by Pseudo-Jonathan that the garden of Eden was created before
the creation of the world is debated in Genesis Rabbah 15, 3. The garden of Eden is included among the ten
things that were created on the eve of the first Sabbath. According to Jubilees 2, 7 and 2 Enoch 30, 1, the
garden of Eden was created on the third day.”
Maher, Michael (1992). Targum Pseudo-Jonathan: Genesis (The Aramaic Bible) (Volume 1). Michael Glazier.

The Three-Part Geography of Eden and Tabernacle
The geography of Eden within the dry land of Genesis 1-3 depicts a three-part topography.

Three-Part Eden Geography Diagram. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

This conception of the garden of Eden on the dry land provides a symbolic template for Israel’s tabernacle
temple, especially as described in Ezekiel’s ideal/restored temple (Ezek. 40-48).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

62 of 188

Three-Part Tabernacle Layout. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

In his book Who Shall Ascend the Mountain of the Lord?, Michel Morales depicts the similaries between the
garden and the tabernacle.

Adapted from Morales, Michael L. (2015). Who Shall Ascend the Mountain of the Lord?: A Biblical Theology of the Book
of Leviticus. IVP Academic. By BibleProject for Classroom: Adam to Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

63 of 188

The Tree of Life
The tree of life is the tree in the center of the garden that imparts eternal life.
Genesis 2:9 Instructor's Translation
And Yahweh God caused to sprout every tree from the ground that is pleasing to the sight and good for
food; and the tree of life was in the middle of the garden, and the tree of knowing of good and bad.
Genesis 3:22 NASB
Then the LORD God said, “Behold, the man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil; and now, he
might stretch out his hand, and take also from the tree of life, and eat, and live forever.”
“[The tree of life] represents life that is beyond the original life that God breathed into human. The first
human by nature is susceptible to death ... Nevertheless, continued eating from the tree could renew life
and prevent death. Apart from disobedience to God’s command, mortals had access to this tree ... The tree
of life allows humanity to transcend its mortality, the state in which it was created on the sixth day, so it can
move to a higher dimension ... to eternal life and immortality. As one partakes of this ... fruit by faith, one
participates in this eternal life. This highest potency of life was available in the garden and becomes once
again available to us as we reenter the temple-garden through the second Adam ... and look forward to the
resurrection of our bodies.”
Waltke, Bruce; Yu, Charles (2007). An Old Testament Theology: An Exegetical, Canonical, and Thematic
Approach. Zondervan.

The Tree of Life in Ancient Near Eastern Perspective
The tree of life was an iconic image in the ancient world. It’s helpful to compare and contrast this tree’s
significance in Mesopotamian, Canaanite, and Egyptian culture with the biblical portrait.
“As any astute tourist quickly observes, the landscape of much the Near East is predominantly stark and
barren. The land is comprised of innumerable shades of brown, with only brief interjections of green and
blue. The higher in elevation one goes, the greener the picture becomes. Consequently, mountains and
rivers, along with the forests that adorn them, seem to be natural focal points anyone who lives or travels in
these lands. The ancient peoples, from the remote western world of Egypt to the eastern river marshes of
Babylonia, lived in the land, not simply on it. They were all agrarian cultures, whose livelihood was found
and maintained among the shade, fruit, shelter, and beauty of their trees. As a result, there can be little
doubt that this lifestyle had a significant effect on these ancient cultures and the way they perceived the
world. Trees were some of the most sacred elements in ancient near Eastern civilizations.”
Osborne, William (2018). Trees and Kings: A Comparative Analysis of Tree Imagery in Israel’s Prophetic
Tradition and the Ancient Near East. Eisenbrauns.

Sacred Trees in Ancient Egypt
Nut, the sky goddess, who is often associated with the sky-dome and the gift of rain, is also often portrayed as
a tree that supplies fruit, water, and life for the land.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

64 of 188

“These images and strong associations between the tree and the goddess do not indicate that the ancients
necessarily believed the tree was equal to the deity, but that the god was like the tree, or at least that the
tree was an embodiment of the deity ...”
Osborne, William (2018). Trees and Kings: A Comparative Analysis of Tree Imagery in Israel’s Prophetic
Tradition and the Ancient Near East. Eisenbrauns.

Egyptian Kings as Trees
The productivity of ancient Egypt was completely dependent upon the Nile, which annually flooded and
irrigated the shores and deltas. Osiris was the deity associated with the Nile, and the one who provided
fertility for the land through the waters. In Egyptian mythology, Osiris was believed to have a son named
Horus, who was incarnate as the Pharaoh. The king stood as the sole mediator between the gods and the
people, responsible for fertility and order.

Wikipedia.

Temple of Karnak: King Sety I (early 1200s B.C.) is sitting in the middle of a tree, being crowned and given a
scepter by Thoth who is writing his name on the leaves of the tree. It’s an image for the king’s role as a god
giving life to the land through the sacred tree.

King, Hugo (2011). Flickr.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

65 of 188

Trees in Mesopotamian Culture (Assyria and Babylon)
Trees and gardens were associated with the royal gardens of imperial kings. The image below depicts a wall
relief of Assyrian king Asshurbanipal’s garden parties (7th century B.C.).

Wikimedia Commons.

Asshurbanipal’s Royal Garden in Nimrud Designed a Microcosm of His Empire
“By the will of the gods, vines, fruit trees of all kinds, olive trees, aromatic trees, flourished greatly in my
gardens. Cypress trees ... grew tall and sent out shoots. I created a marsh for the flow of water for the
gardens ... Birds of the heavens, herons ... boars and deer ... gave birth in abundance.”
Royal Inscriptions of Sennacharib, Text #8

SPL. National Geographic.

Trees and the Gods
Ur-Nammu of Ur (2060-1955 B.C.) offering a libation to a tree, which apparently represents the moon god
Nanna, who sits enthroned behind it (cf. 239). The beneficent power of the god is present in the tree (cf. 253-

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

66 of 188

55). The king, in strengthening the tree by a drink offering, enhances that power. In return, the tree dispenses
life-giving water.

Keel, Othmar (2015), page 135. Creation: Biblical Theologies in the Context of the Ancient Near East.
Eisenbrauns.

The Motif of a Divine Tree Protected by the Gods Comes from Mesopotamia
A carving from Nimrud shows goats around a tree of life, symbolizing its vitality, and then cherubim, showing
that it’s also the domain of the gods (also below, a plaque stitched to the chest of a deceased person in a
tomb).

Keel, Othmar (2015), page 135. Creation: Biblical Theologies in the Context of the Ancient Near East.
Eisenbrauns.

Trees of Life in Syria-Canaanite Tradition
Syrian seal (1750-1550 B.C.): Two goats flank and eat from the cosmic world tree, symbolizing food given to all
creatures of the land (birds, goats, fish) by the gods who stand nearby. To the right, the giant is the storm god
with his plant-scepter.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

67 of 188

Keel, Othmar (2015). “Image #21,” Creation: Biblical Theologies in the Context of the Ancient Near East.
Eisenbrauns.

Kuntillet ʿAjrud (Sinai Peninsula), 9th-8th Century B.C.
This image was found in a fortress in the Sinai peninsula, with an inscription that mentions Yahweh and
Asherah. The image was certainly drawn by an Israelite, who here shows familiarity with the ancient Near
Eastern motif of the tree of life.

Wikipedia.

Summary of Ancient Tree Imagery
Osborne concludes that tree imagery in the ancient Near East is interwoven in three ways.
1. Abundance and prosperity from the gods are depicted as abundant gardens and tree-filled forests.
2. Deities and their powers to give fertility are regularly associated with tree symbols.
3. Kings who mediate the power of the gods are either the caretakers of trees or symbolized as trees
themselves.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

68 of 188

Comparisons and Contrasts with Genesis 1-2
The biblical images take on a life of their own and a unique meaning within the Bible. But they are also rooted
in the ancient cultures of Israel’s neighbors.
Seeing the garden/tree imagery as a design pattern of Heaven on Earth in its ancient context is helpful in
understanding why garden imagery is so pervasive throughout the Bible. It was the language of Heaven and
Earth in the time of the biblical authors.
In Genesis 1-2, all humanity is given the royal task of stewarding the garden and its trees. This fits with the
pattern of the image of God, where all humanity assumes the role of the king.
The tree is not divine but a symbol of divine life and abundance that can be internalized (eaten). The tree is
not magic; rather is is an image of proximity to the source of divine life.

Jesus and Garden Imagery
The New Testament authors build upon this imagery to communicate what was accomplished through the life
and death of Jesus. Take for example the opening of John’s Gospel.
John 1:14 NASB
And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw his glory, glory as of the only begotten from
the Father, full of grace and truth.
When you look at Jesus, you are seeing the divine glory that used to only be accessible by one priest, one
time a year in the temple. But now, what was contained “in the middle” is now unleashed in Jesus. Throughout
the rest of the Gospel, John continues to use this Eden/temple imagery, like when Jesus is called the water of
life, the vine of God’s life, the new temple, and when he is crucified and lifted up on the high place.

Reflection Question
The garden of Eden is more than just a safe and fertile piece of land—it’s a symbol of a bigger reality. What
does the garden of Eden represent?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

69 of 188

