Session 4: Pieces and Patterns in Biblical Narrative

Key Takeaways
The Bible is like a photo mosaic with identifiable smaller literary units crafted and arranged to work
together and create a larger, overarching message.
Biblical authors use repeated scenes, often with slight variations, to develop themes throughout the
story.

Design Patterns and Literary Analysis
Recall our earlier exploration of the origins of the Hebrew Bible. It’s a collection of collections that has been
written, adapted, and edited into a unified whole. Consider two additional analogies that will help us
understand the significance of this fact for how we read and interpret biblical literature.

Silvers, Robert (2000). Louis Armstrong. Photomosaic.com.

The unique unity of the larger photo mosaic is achieved precisely by its composite nature. The thematic
arrangement of light/dark/great tiny squares becomes a tool to create larger patterns of color that provide an
ordered, unified picture of the subject. The Hebrew Bible displays this kind of mosaic unity on a large and
small scale.

Analogy 2: Repeated Motifs and Themes in Film
Movie directors often create a cohesive unity to the themes and plot line of a story by repetition and variation.
By building up viewer expectations through repetition, the artist can introduce variation and surprise.
One example of this is the motif of the ring temptation scene in The Lord of the Rings. Some characters are
tempted by the ring’s power, and they succumb to it (Smeagol, Boromir, Frodo). Other characters resist its

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

13 of 188

power but in different ways (Bilbo, barely, Gandalf and Galadriel, through fear and trembling, and Aragorn, like
it’s no problem!). This diverse set of responses to the ring’s power creates a rich palette of characters and a
complex portrait of power in the story.

Jackson, P. (Director). (2001-2003). The Lord of the Rings Series [Film]. New Line Cinema.

The biblical authors were masters of this technique. In fact, this basic principle of patterned repetition and
analogy is the most fundamental tool in their repertoire. And it’s accomplished through the simplest of
means: strategic repetition of key words.

Reading Strategies Based on Analogies
These two analogies illustrate different features of the TaNaK collection that create the need for two related
reading strategies.
1. Identifying literary units: Just as a photo mosaic consists of hundreds of smaller photos, the epic
biblical narrative consists of hundreds of smaller episodes. Learn to identify the beginning and ending
of literary units that make up the larger mosaic of a biblical book.
2. Identifying repeated words and themes: Just as the smaller photos in a photo mosaic are organized
according to patterns of color, light, and tone, the literary units of the biblical narrative are woven
together through patterns of repeated words, themes, and images. These repetitions invite the reader
to see continuity and an ongoing argument that develops throughout the course of the story.

Applying the Strategies to the Eden Narrative
When all the above principles are applied to a literary analysis, it yields the following outline of the Eden
narrative.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

14 of 188

Verses

Unit

Part

Movement

2:4-6 No garden, humans, or rain

2:4-17

2:4-25

2:4-3:24

From Wasteland

From Isolated

The Eden

to Eden

Wasteland to

Narrative: From

Communion in

Garden to Exile

2:7-9 God plants a garden and forms
human

Eden

2:10-14 The Eden river flows to become
four rivers

2:15-17 Human put in the garden +
divine command

2:18-20 Problem: a human alone

2:18-25
From Isolation to

2:21-23 Solution: two humans out of

Communion

one

2:24-25 Two humans married

3:1-5 Dialogue between snake and

3:1-13

woman

Folly and the Fall

3:6-7 Woman and man eat from the
tree

3:8-13 Dialogue between God and
humans

3:14-15 Curse on the snake

3:16 Consequences for the woman

3:14-24

3:14-24

The Fallout

The Fallout and
Exile from Eden

3:17-19 Consequences for the man

3:20-21 Provision of garments

3:22-24
Humans exiled from Eden

Identifying the Literary Units of Genesis 2-3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to
Noah (2020).

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

15 of 188

Reflection Question
Tim uses two analogies to show us some important Bible study skills. What can the photo mosaic help us pay
attention to? What about the ring temptations from The Lord of the Rings?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

16 of 188

