Session 26: Offerings at the Door of the Garden

Key Takeaways
Cain and Abel introduce the biblical pattern of shepherds representing reliance on God and farmers
representing self-reliance.
Yahweh’s favor can be a cause of jealousy and danger.
Textual clues indicate that the brothers were offering sacrifices at the door to the garden in Eden.

Cain and Abel’s Offering: Translation and Literary Design of
Genesis 4:2-7
Cain and Abel’s Offering
a 2b and Abel was a shepherd of flocks,
b but Cain was a tiller of the ground,
c 3 and it came from the end of days
b' and Cain

brought from the fruit of the ground
an offering to Yahweh.
a' 4 and Abel

also he brought from the firstborn of his flock
and from their fat portions,

a

and Yahweh gazed
b upon Abel and for his offering;
b' 5 but upon Cain and upon his offering

a' he did not gaze.

a and there was heat-anger to Cain,
b and his face fell ,
6 and Yahweh said to Cain,

a' Why is there heat-anger to you?
b' and why has your face fallen ?
a 7 If you do good ,
b

won’t there be lifting up ,

a' and if you do not do good ,
b'

at the door, sin is a croucher ,

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

140 of 188

b

c' and its desire is for you,
c' but you can rule it.""

The Cain and Abel Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah (2020).

Farmers vs. Shepherds, the City vs. the Wilderness
Cain and Abel are first introduced by their economic and cultural domains. Cain is a farmer who works the
ground, and Abel is a shepherd who works among migrating flocks. These two vocations have important
associations throughout the biblical narrative.

Farming and Cities
Organized agriculture in the ancient Near East was associated with the world’s first empires (Babylon and
Egypt), where slave labor and infrastructure provided the groundwork for mass farming. It’s no accident that
Cain will become associated with the first cities in the Bible (Gen. 4:17) and the advent of technology and
civilization (Gen. 4:20-22).

Shepherding and the Desert
Shepherds who migrated with their grazing animals were nomads that lived on the borders of urban society.
They tended to be viewed as lower class (though they could produce great wealth) and outside the value
systems of the great cities and empires (shepherds were viewed as despicable by urban Egyptians
(Gen. 43:32; 46:34).
Generally, Yahweh identifies himself with the shepherd underdog throughout the Bible and consistently
reveals himself to people in the desert, to shepherds outside the imperial systems of organized human power
and prestige.
Abraham the shepherd is called out of the cities of Babylon (“Ur of the Chaldeans”) and Haran in Syria
(Gen. 11:31-12:4).
Isaac and Jacob and his many sons are all shepherds living on the edge of urban centers in the land of
Canaan.
Moses meets Yahweh in the desert of Sinai while shepherding his flock (Exod. 3).
Yahweh forms the people of Israel by leading them out of Egypt (where they farm and build cities) and
establishing them as his covenant people in the Sinai desert.
Israel’s first true king, David, was a shepherd (1 Sam. 16:11), while the illegitimate king, Saul, was a farmer
of the field (1 Sam. 11:5).
Yahweh himself is portrayed as Israel’s shepherd (Ps. 23:1-6), and he dwells in a tent (2 Sam. 7:6).
This contrast continues throughout the rest of the Hebrew Bible, and it is introduced in the Cain and Abel
story in order to prepare us for what happens next. It should not surprise us that God favors the shepherd and
that the “city boy” (or “farmer boy”) is the negative character.

Yahweh’s Favor for Abel but Not for Cain
Class Notes: Adam to Noah

141 of 188

The narrative is very spare, but it’s precise in directing the reader’s attention that what we’re supposed to
notice in the Cain and Abel narrative.

The Nature of the Offerings
Cain brings “the fruit of the ground.” Cain is, like Adam his father, a tiller of the ground, which has been
cursed. Cain’s offering, while legitimate, is an undifferentiated vegetable and grain bundle.
Abel’s offering is “from the firstborn of the flock, and from the fat portions.” Notice the extra detail devoted to
the description of Abel’s offering, which highlights two layers of value: (1) the firstborn of the flock (the
greatest symbolic value), and (2) the fat portions (the tastiest and most nutritious portions). The narrative
implies a direct contrast here between Cain’s bundled veggies and Abel’s carefully selected and valuable
animal offering.
“By giving the first-born and the best of the animal (i.e. the fat), Abel would be understood as having given
everything to God.”
Hess, Richard (1992). “Abel.” The Anchor Yale Bible Dictionary, A-C, Vol. 1. Yale University Press.
While both offerings are legitimate (grain and animal offerings are both described in the sacrificial rules of
Leviticus 1-7), the lavish value ascribed to Abel’s offering makes Cain’s gift pale in comparison. But the fault
isn’t simply in the ingredients of the offering but what they indicated about the character of the one offering.

God Does Not “Reject” Cain
God’s favor on Abel does not constitute a rejection of Cain, though he seems to experience it as such. God
immediately reaches out to Cain, continues a long dialogue with him, and tells him that this moment is not
permanent.
God tells Cain the way to favor: “do what is good.” The implication is that God can discern, somehow, in Cain’s
offering that all is not well in his heart, mind, and character. So he works with Cain and invites him to do the
right thing to experience divine favor.
“The issue in Genesis 4 is one of ethics, not of sacrificial ingredient ... Nonetheless, there exists a possibility
that a comparative ethical value is reflected in the quality of the sacrifices offered ... With the same
ingredients, the human roles could have been reversed ... Cain would have selected the best of what the
earth can offer, and Abel would killed an animal picked gingerly from the heard ... The emphasis is not on
the ingredient of the sacrifices but on the disposition of the one offering.”
LaCocque, Andre (2008). Onslaught Against Innocence: Cain, Abel, and the Yahwist. Cascade Books.

The Firstborn Rivalry and Yahweh
Cain’s birth story draws attention to him as the firstborn. His mother boasts of her ability to “create” a man,
and this man goes on to take the place of Adam as a “worker of the ground.”

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

142 of 188

Cain is also the first to bring an offering, as the patriarch or firstborn male always does as their prerogative.
The firstborn was to be acknowledged as the one who received the greater share of the inheritance
(Deut. 21:17) as the father’s representative (Gen. 49:3). In Genesis, the male head of the family offers sacrifices
(Noah in 8:20; Abraham in 12:4-10) and passes on the blessing and right of the first-born (Gen. 27).
In Genesis 4:3, we’re told first that Cain brought his offering. Then, all of a sudden, we’re told, “And Abel, he
also brought from the firstborn of his flocks ...”
If Abel’s offering is not an effort at usurpation of his elder brother (and it may well be), the narrator is at least
showing us that the first-born is being shown up by his younger brother. And to top it all off, Yahweh favors
Abel!
This begins a major theme in the book of Genesis: that God carries forward his promises in ways that subvert
and challenge traditional wisdom in human societies, and he loves to elevate the underdog and the
disadvantaged.

Sacrifices at the Door of the Garden
Cain and Abel are introduced in a narrative about worship as they make their offerings before Yahweh. But
where is this story taking place?
Genesis 3:22-24 tells us that the humans were sent out from the garden of Eden “to the east” and that
on that eastern border of Eden, Yahweh stationed cherubim and a sword.
When Cain is exiled after murdering his brother in Genesis 4:16, we’re told he went “east of Eden.” This
means that Genesis 4:1-16 is taking place within Eden, near the eastern edge of the garden.
There are numerous clues in this narrative and in later design patterns about the tabernacle and temple
that point to envisioning this offering as taking place at the “door” of the garden of Eden, which is
mentioned in Genesis 4:7.
The “door” of Genesis 4:7 is often taken to metaphorically refer to the door of Cain’s heart or mind, where the
sinful urge is waiting for him. But this is not what the Hebrew text says. Genesis 4:7 consists of three words in
Hebrew: “at the door” (‫)לפתח‬, sin (‫ )חטאת‬is a croucher (‫)רבץ‬. The metaphorical “door of the heart” is used
nowhere else in the Hebrew Bible, whereas the narrative context provides us with a perfectly plausible
explanation.
Cain and Abel are depicted as offering their sacrifices at the door of the garden of Eden, in front of the
cherubim and the entrance into the holy place of God’s heavenly presence on Earth. The sinful, animal-like
temptation to rebel against God has exited the garden with them and is now “at the door” alongside them.
With this reading, the later tabernacle and temple mirror this precise scene, as the altar was placed directly
east in front of the “door” (‫ )פתח‬to the sacred space, where offerings were made before the priests could
enter into sacred space.

Resource Recommendation
For more on topic of sacrifices at the door of Eden, see Azevedo, J (1999). “At the Door of Paradise: A
Contextual Interpretation of Genesis 4:7.” Biblische Notizen, vol. 100.

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

143 of 188

Reflection Question
Is there something wrong with Cain’s offering? Was Cain rejected by God?

Class Notes: Adam to Noah

144 of 188

