Session 15: The Covenant of Circumcision

Key Takeaways
Hagar plays out an an inverted prelude to the exodus. As an Egyptian slave fleeing oppression at the
hands of Avram and Sarai, she meets God’s mercy and blessing in the wilderness.
Both Hagar and Avram face a de-creation and re-creation moment in this narrative—Hagar in wilderness
and blessing, and Avram in circumcision and a new name.
The covenant of circumcision reflects the language of God’s covenant with Noah in Genesis 9. It is a
sign both of God’s judgment and his grace.

Yahweh Hears the Cry
The story of Yahweh hearing the cry of the oppressed and intervening to deliver and judge violent evil is an
important template at work in Genesis 16. The hyperlinks to Genesis 4 and 6 portray Hagar among the
righteous sufferers whose outcry reaches up to God.
At the spring )‫(עין‬, Yahweh hears of the oppression )‫ (עני‬of Hagar, and sends his messenger to deliver the
righteous (Gen. 16:7, 11).
Genesis 4:10 Instructor’s Translation
... What have you done? The voice of the shed-blood of your brother is crying out )‫ (צעק‬to me from the
ground.
Genesis 6:13 Instructor’s Translation
An end of all flesh has come )‫ (קץ … בא‬up before me ...
Genesis 18:20-21 Instructor’s Translation
The outcry )‫ (זעקה‬against Sodom and Gomorrah is great ... the outcry )‫ (צעקה‬has come up )‫ (באה‬before me.
And in Genesis 19:1, Yahweh sends his messengers to deliver the righteous.
This theme of the outcry of the oppressed rising up to God is at work in this story as well. Avraham and Sarai
are portrayed as “doing violence” and “oppression” to their Egyptian slave. In each case of this design pattern,
Yahweh enacts some kind of judgment against human evil.

Yahweh Hears the Cry
This story is remarkable because it follows the first mention of the future Egyptian enslavement of Israel in
Genesis. The wordplay linkages are significant.

Class Notes: Abraham

101 of 230

Genesis 15:13-14 Instructor’s Translation
13

Know for certain that your seed will be immigrants (Heb. ger / ‫ )גר‬in a land that is not theirs, and they will

be enslaved to them, and they will oppress (Heb. ‘anah / ‫ )ענה‬them four hundred years.

14

But also that I

myself will judge the nation whom to which they are slaves, and afterward they will come out with many
possessions.
Genesis 16:1, 6 Instructor’s Translation
1

Now, Sarai ... had a slave-girl ... named Hagar (Heb. ha-gar / ‫“ = הגר‬The Immigrant”)

6

And Sarai oppressed (Heb. ‘anah / ‫ )ענה‬her, and she fled.

Exodus 1:11 Instructor’s Translation
And [the Egyptians] set over [the Israelites] captains of slave-labor, in order to oppress )‫ (ענה‬them.
Long before the Egyptians deceived the Israelites and oppressed them, Avraham deceived Pharaoh and Sarai
oppressed an Egyptian. The fact that this story precedes the exodus story means that the Egyptian slavery of
Avraham’s descendants becomes a tragically ironic reversal: Egypt does to Israel what Israel first did to
Egypt.
There is some connection here to the laws about the treatment of immigrants in the covenant code, and the
relationship to the Cain story (see Exod. 22:21-23).
Exodus 22:21-23 Instructor’s Translation
21

You shall not wrong an immigrant )‫ (גר‬or oppress him, for you were immigrants in the land of Egypt.

You shall not oppress )‫ (ענה‬any widow or orphan.

23

22

If you intensely oppress )‫ (ענה תענה‬him, and if he does

cry out )‫ (צעק‬to me, I will surely hear his outcry )‫;(צעקה‬

24

and my anger will be hot )‫(חרה אפי‬, and I will kill

you )‫ (הרג‬with the sword, and your wives shall become widows and your children fatherless.
Here are more links to the divided brothers pattern.
Genesis 16:12 "He will be a donkey of a man )‫ "(פרא אדם‬which recalls the “divided” )‫ (פרד‬motif of Noah’s
sons from Genesis 10:5, 32.
Genesis 16:12b “He will dwell against the face of all his brothers” is recalled in Genesis 25:18, when
Yishmael (Ishmael) settles in the east.
There is an important foundation being laid here for the “righteous non-elect” of the covenant family who
dwells in the east. Just as many of the non-elect peoples in Genesis 10 will later turn up as righteous gentiles
or wicked gentiles, the same is true here with Yishmael. He and Hagar are the recipients of divine blessing (
Gen. 16:10 inverts Gen. 3:16 and restates Gen. 15:5, but now applied to Yishmael!). And while future conflict
between Yishmael’s descendants and Avraham’s other future sons is anticipated, the oracle isn’t entirely
negative. Yishmael is included in the blessing of Avraham nonetheless.

Genesis 15-16 Replays Genesis 2-11 and 12-14

Class Notes: Abraham

102 of 230

Genesis 2

Genesis 3

Genesis 4-6

Violence, Flood,

• God’s blessing of

• Foolish failure at the

• Brothers with

Remnant, Covenant

fruitful seed

tree of testing that is

abundance

(Gen. 6-9a)

• Garden abundance

“good of sight”

• Jealousy and conflict

• Sacred space of

• She saw … and took

• Brothers “separate”

God’s presence by the

and gave

through violence

tree of life on Mt. Eden

• Deception and lack of

• Non-chosen brother

• Deep sleep and the

trust in God’s word

settles in the east,

provision of the

• Exile from Eden

where violence is

delivering-help (‫)עזר‬

simmering, leading to
a flood of judgment

Genesis 9:18-20

Genesis 9:21-29

Genesis 10:1-32

Rebellion, Scattering,

• Human blessing and

• Human folly in the

• Family, brothers

Remnant, Promise

abundance in a

garden

divide and separate

(Gen. 11)

garden

• Sexual abuse in the

• Building of Babylon in

tent

east

• Family division and

• Rebellion is

curse

simmering

Genesis 12:1-9

Genesis 12:10-20

Genesis 13

Violence, Flood,

• God’s blessing of

• Foolish failure with

• Brother with

Remnant, Covenant

abundance and

Sarai in Egypt who is

abundance

(Gen. 14)

protection

“beautiful of sight”

• Jealousy and conflict

• Promise of fruitful

• Deception and lack of

• Brothers separate

seed

trust in God’s word

through non-violence!

• God’s presence at

• Exile from false-Eden

• Non-chosen brother

tree and mountains

(i.e., Egypt) results in

settles in the east,

getting a slave

where violence is
simmering, leading up
to a flood of judgment

Genesis 15:1-21

Genesis 16:1-6

Genesis 16:7-16

Violence, Flood,

• God’s blessing and

• Foolish failure with

• Yahweh meets non-

Remnant, Covenant

promise of seed and

Hagar the Egyptian

chosen rival wife in the

(Gen. 17)

land

slave

wilderness

• Deep sleep and the

• Sarai takes and gives

• Promise of a son

provision of the seed (

to her husband

whose hand will be

‫)זרע‬

• And she saw …

against all his brothers

• “Do what's good in
your eyes”

Genesis 15-16 As a Replay. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

The story has portrayed both Avram and Sarai as humans who repeat their folly. Now, as the sequence of
Genesis 15-16 replays the key elements of Genesis 12-13, both Avram and Sarai replay the folly of humanity

Class Notes: Abraham

103 of 230

from Genesis 1-11. And so, for the second time, we expect there to be some kind of divine judgment that
confronts the sin of foolish, violent humans and stems the tide of their destructive choices. This is precisely
the theme of Genesis 17.

Covenant #2 With Avraham: Sign of Circumcision
This is the longest and most complicated speech so far in the book of Genesis. Before diving into its details,
it’s helpful to get an overview of its main content and literary organization.

Macro Design of Genesis 17
At its most basic, the chapter is designed in a simple three-step progression.

Genesis 17:1-16
A - God's Speech to Avraham: Covenant, Promise of Seed , Summons to Circumcise Every Male

Genesis 17:17-22
B - God and Avraham Dialogue about the Promise of Seed

Genesis 17:23-27
A' - Avraham Circumcises Every Male in His House
Genesis 17:1-27 (3-Step). Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Genesis 17:1-3
Speech 1, Initial Statement: Yahweh Will Make a Covenant With Avram
a - When Avram was a son of ninety-nine years,
b - and Yahweh became visible to Avram, and said to him
c - "I will give my covenant between me and between you
d - I will multiply you very very much "
e - And Avram fell upon his face

Genesis 17:4-16
17:4-8
A - Speech 2, The Covenant: New Name Blessing, Royal Seed, Land
“And Elohim spoke to him saying …"
As for me [Yahweh] …
My covenant is with you
No longer will your name be called Avram, but "Avraham" will be your name

Class Notes: Abraham

104 of 230

I will make you a multitude of nations
I will make you fruitful, very very much
and kings will come from you

17:9-14
B - Speech 3, Sign of the Covenant: Circumcision, Cut Off Foreskin
“And Elohim said to Avraham …”
As for you [Avraham] …
This is my covenant that you will keep: Circumcise every male ...
Any son of eight days will be circumcised , every male of your generations ...
The foreskin of a male that is not circumcised ... he will cut off from his people ...

17:15-16
A' - Speech 4, The Promise: New Name Blessing, Son, Royal Seed
“And Elohim said to Avraham …”
As for Sarai …
Her name will not be called Sarai, but "Sarah" is her name
And I will bless her
and she will become nations
kings of peoples will be from her

Genesis 17:17-22
Yahweh's Appeal to Israel: Turn to Me and Live!
e - And Avram fell upon his face
d - "Will there be a birth for a son of one-hundred years?!"
c - "I will establish my covenant with Yitskhaq ..."
b - "I will multiply [Yishmael] very very much"
a - And he finished speaking to him, and Elohim went up from Avraham

Genesis 17:23-27
Narrative: Fulfillment of the Circumcision Command
And Avraham took Yishmael … everyone born of his house, every male …
and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin just as God said.

Genesis 17:1-27 (Detailed). Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

This literary organization highlights a number of key themes in the chapter.

Class Notes: Abraham

105 of 230

The narrative of a divine command (Gen. 17:1-22) followed by a narrative of Avraham fulfilling the divine
command exactly (Gen. 17:23-27) highlights Avraham’s obedience and trust in Yahweh. Even though it must
have been a painful experience, Avraham circumcised himself and every male in his household out of
obedient trust in God’s word.
The five speeches are designed in a symmetrical order, and each one has a distinct main point and rhetorical
thrust.

Genesis 17:1-3
Speech 1

• Avram is summoned to be faithful to Yahweh
• Initial statement: I will set up a covenant between you and me and bless you
A- Genesis 17:4-8
Speech 2

• Avram re-created into Avraham: father of many nations, including kings
• Yahweh will be the Elohim of Avraham and his seed and they will inherit land
B- Genesis 17:9-14
Speech 3

• Avraham's covenant obligation: circumcision as covenant sign
A'- Genesis 17:15-16
Speech 4
Sarai is re-created into Sarah: blessing, son, kings will come from her

Genesis 17:17-22
Dialogue + Speech 5

• Avraham proposes Yishmael
• God chooses Yitskhaq through Sarah as the chosen son
Genesis 17:1-22. Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 17:1-27

Genesis 17:1-3

Class Notes: Abraham

106 of 230

1 And Avram was ninety nine years old,

and Yahweh became seen to Avram,
and he said to him,
“I am El-Shaddai.
Walk before my face,
and be blameless;
2 then I will give a covenant between me and between you,

and I will multiply you very, very much .”
3 And Avram fell down upon his face.

Genesis 17:4-16
And Elohim spoke to him, saying:
4 “ As for me , look, my covenant is with you,

and you will become a father of a multitude of nations,
5 and no longer will your name be called, ‘Avram,’

but your name will be ‘Avraham,’
because I will give you to be a multitude of nations,
6 and I will make you fruitful, very very much,

and I will give you to become nations,
and kings will come from you,
A

7 and I will establish my covenant

between me and between you,
and between your seed after you for their generations,
as an eternal covenant ,
to be Elohim for you ,
and for your seed after you
8 and I will give to you and to your seed after you,

the land of your sojourning,
all the land of Canaan,
for an eternal possession ,
and I will be Elohim for them .”

9 And Elohim said to Avraham,

“ And as for you ,you will keep my covenant ,
you and your seed after you for their generations.
10 This is my covenant that y’all will keep,

between me and between y’all,
and between your seed after you:
circumcise for yourselves every male.
11 And y’all will circumcise the flesh of your foreskin,

and that will be as a symbol of the covenant ,

Class Notes: Abraham

107 of 230

between me and between y’all.

B

12 When there’s a son of eight days,

he will be circumcised for you, every male for your generations;
one born of the house or purchased with silver,
from any son of a foreigner who is not from your seed ;
13 he will certainly be circumcised ,

that one born of the house or purchased with silver;
and my covenant will be in your flesh,
for an eternal covenant .
14 And a foreskinned male that is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin,

that person will be cut off from his people,
he has violated my covenant .

15 And Elohim said to Avraham,

“ As for Sarai your wife,
you will not call her name ‘Sarai ,’
because her name is ‘Sarah.’ [= “Queen”]
A'

16 And I will bless her,

and also, I will give to you from her a son,
and I will bless her,
and she will become nations,
kings of people groups will be from her .”

Genesis 17:17-22
17 And Avraham fell on his face,

and he laughed (= yitskhaq) and said in his heart,
“Will there be a birth for a son of a hundred years?!
Or Sarah, a daughter of ninety years, she will give birth?!”
18 And Avraham said to Elohim,

“If only Yishmael could live before your face!”

19 And Elohim said,

“Nonetheless, Sarah your wife will birth for you a son,
A

and you will call his name, 'Yitskhaq ' [= "Laughter"],
and I will establish my covenant with him,
for an eternal covenant for his seed after him.

20 And as for Yishmael, I have heard you.

look, I have blessed him,
and I will make him fruitful ,
B

Class Notes: Abraham

108 of 230

B

and I will make him multiply , very very much.
Twelve princes he will cause to be born,
and I will give him to be a great nation .

A'

21 But I will establish my covenant with Yitskhaq,

whom Sarah will birth for you at this appointed time in the year after."

22 And he finished speaking to him,

and Elohim went up from Avraham.

Genesis 17:23-27
23 And Avraham took Yishmael his son,

and all those born of his house,
and all those purchased with silver,
every male among the men of Avraham's house,
and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin,
on that very day,
just as Elohim had spoken to him.

a 24 And Avraham was a son of ninety nine years,
b when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin,
a' 25 and Yishmael his son was a son of thirteen years,
b' when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

26 On that very day,

Avraham was circumcised , and Yishmael his son,
27 and all the men of his house,

those born of the house
and those purchased with silver from a foreigner,
they were circumcised with him.

Genesis 17:1-27. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

The De-creation and Re-creation of Avram and Sarai
This complex narrative is designed to culminate the themes at work so far in all of Genesis 1-17, and especially
the earlier patterns of creation and Eden and of flood and covenant.
Numerous details in this chapter only make sense based on our ability to track the hyperlinks and analogies
with these earlier narratives.

Class Notes: Abraham

109 of 230

Avraham and Noah, Circumcision and Flood
Avraham

Noah

Gen. 17:1 “ Walk (‫ )התהלך‬before me and be

Gen. 6:9b “Noah was a righteous man,

blameless (‫”)תמים‬

blameless (‫ )תמים‬in his generations, he walked (

‫ )התהלך‬with God.”
Gen. 17:4-5 “You will become the father of a

Gen. 6:10 “Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and

multitude of nations (‫ גוים‬... ‫”)אב‬

Japheth” who become the patriarchs of the 70
nations in Genesis 10.

Gen. 17:7 “And I will establish my covenant (

Gen. 6:18 “And I will establish my covenant (

‫ )והקמתי את בריתי‬between you and between you
and between your seed after you (‫ )זרעך אחריך‬for

‫ )והקמתי את בריתי‬with you”

generations, as an eternal covenant.”

Gen. 9:9 “And I will establish my covenant (

‫ )מקים את בריתי‬with you and with your seed after
you (‫”)את זרעכם אחריכם‬
Gen. 17:11 “And you will circumcise the flesh of

Gen. 9:12 “This will be a sign of the covenant

your foreskin, and it will be for a sign of the

between me and between you”

covenant between me and between you.”
Gen. 9:17 “This is the sign of the covenant which
Gen. 17:13 “And my covenant will be in your flesh

I am establishing between me and between all

(‫ )בבשרכם‬for an eternal covenant ” (‫)ברית עולם‬

flesh (‫”)בשר‬

Gen. 17:26 “on that very day (‫)בעצם היום הזה‬, just as

Gen. 7:13 “On that very day (‫ )בעצם היום הזה‬Noah

God spoke to him”

went … into the ark.” + Gen. 7:16 “just as God
commanded him”

Avraham and Noah, Circumcision and Flood. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham
(2021).

This linking of Noah and Avraham creates a clear set of similarities and contrasts between the two characters
and God’s covenant with them.
While Noah simply was “blameless” when God initiated the conversation, Avram, on the other hand, has just
participated in a great sin against Hagar (on analogy with Gen. 3 and 6), resulting in the oppression of the
immigrant, so he now has to be commanded: “be blameless.”
The “sign” of the covenant for Noah and Avraham is crucial for understanding the nature and purpose of
circumcision. In Genesis 9:12-17, the “sign” of the covenant is the rainbow which shines when the rain clouds
come. Rain was the instrument of divine judgment, and so the rainbow is a reminder of humanity’s evil that
brought the flood. But rain was also the divine response of judgment combined with covenant love that

Class Notes: Abraham

110 of 230

spared a remnant. In a similar way, in Genesis 17:11, 13, the “sign” of the covenant marks the instrument of
human failure, that is, Avraham’s genitals (this seems hinted at in the design pattern of Gen. 9:17 “covenant
with flesh”). But the judgment is on the part of Avraham’s body that will become fruitful for the nation.

Rainbow

Circumcision

A symbol of God's judgment and mercy that

A symbol of God’s judgment on Avraham’s penis,

brought a remnant safely through death to new life

which he used to abuse Hagar. But also a symbol

before God.

of mercy, for his future seed will come from his
“cut off” genitals that belong to God alone.

Gen. 9:9 God is going to “establish my covenant

Gen. 17:7 God is going to “establish my covenant

with you and your seed after you” (

with you and your seed after you” (

‫ זרע‬+ ‫ ברית‬+ ‫)הקים‬

‫ זרע‬+ ‫ ברית‬+ ‫)הקים‬

Gen. 9:12 The bow in the skies is the “sign of the

Gen. 17:11 Circumcision is the “sign of the

covenant” (‫)אות הברית‬

covenant” (‫)אות ברית‬

Gen. 9:10-12 The flood (‫“ )המבול‬cut off all flesh” (

Gen. 17:10-14 Circumcision (‫ )המול‬involves cutting

‫ בשר‬+ ‫)כרת‬, and so God’s covenant is with Noah
and “all living beings” (‫)כל נפש‬, that they will not be
“cut off by the flood” (‫ המבול‬+ ‫)כרת‬.

off “flesh” (‫ )בשר‬from “every male” (‫)כל זכר‬, and
every “living-person” (‫ )נפש‬who is not circumcised
will be “cut off from” (‫ מן‬... ‫ )כרת‬his people.

Rainbow and Circumcision. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Just as the flood )‫ (המבול‬was a judgment of cutting off )‫ (יכרת‬all flesh )‫ (בשר‬in Genesis 9:11, so now
circumcision )‫ (המול‬is a "local flood" of judgment that cuts off )‫ (נכרתה‬the flesh )‫ (בשר‬of the foreskin of
Avraham’s family in Gen. 17:10-14. It is as if Avraham’s sin “cuts off” all hope except for an Yitskhaq-remnant
(Isaac-remnant) that God will miraculously bring into the world through Sarah’s womb // the Noah-remnant
that God miraculously saves through the ark. Both events happen “on the very day” (‫ בעצם היום הזה‬in Gen. 7:13
and Gen. 17:24, 26) of the command.

8 And Elohim said to Noah and to his sons with him , saying,

9 “And I myself, behold, I set up my covenant with y’all,

and with your seed after you;
10 and with every living creature that is with you ,

the birds, the beasts, and every living creature of the land with you ;
from everything that comes out of the ark,
even every living creature of the land.
11 And I set up my covenant with y’all;

and never again will all flesh

Class Notes: Abraham

be cut off by the waters of the flood ,

111 of 230

and never again will there be a flood to ruin the land .”

12 And Elohim said ,

“This is the sign of the covenant which I am giving
between me and between you
and between every living creature that is with you , for everlasting generations;
13 I give my bow in the cloud ,

and it will be for a sign of a covenant
between me and between the land;

14 and it will come about when I cloud a cloud over the land,

that it will be seen , the bow in the cloud ,
15 and I will remember my covenant,

which is between me and between you
and between every living creature of all flesh ;
and never again will the waters become a flood to ruin

all flesh .

16 And the bow is in the cloud ,

then I will see it ,
to remember the everlasting covenant
between Elohim and between every living creature,
with all flesh that is on the land.”

17 And Elohim said to Noah ,

“This is the sign of

the covenant which I have set up

between me and all flesh that is on the land.”

Genesis 9:8-17. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Adam to Noah
(2020).
Both covenants with Avraham and Noah have a universal scope. Noah’s sons produce all the nations of
Genesis 10, and Avraham will become the father of many nations. This aligns well with the fact that Yishmael
is the first to be circumcised in Genesis 17, and that circumcision is associated with the inclusion of the
nations into God’s covenant with Avraham.
The blessed sons: Just as two of Noah’s three sons found blessing and fruitfulness after the flood (Japheth and
Shem), so also Avraham’s two sons Yishmael and Yitskhaq (Isaac) will be blessed and become great nations. In
both cases, only the younger of the two will become the line of the covenant (Shem and Yitskhaq), while the
older (Japheth and Yishmael) will be blessed, but not as the carrier of covenant blessing.

Class Notes: Abraham

112 of 230

The role of Sarah in this story is like the ark )‫(תבה‬. She is the vehicle of the future seed, but her distorted
efforts to build her own Eden-blessing (remember “build" ‫ בנה‬in Gen. 16:2) have also replayed the fall and
introduced division into Avraham’s family. Her role in this way also recalls the ark’s role as an analogy to the
woman in Genesis 2 (Gen. 2:22 ‫)בנה‬. Note how Sarah here (Gen. 17:17) is also called “a daughter of 90 years”
which is an anagram of the word “ark” (Gen 6:14 ‫ תבה‬// ‫ הבת‬Gen. 17:17)

Avraham and Sarah, Adam and Eve
The analogies to the Eden story are also important. God’s covenant with Noah was a kind of re-creation of his
identity, and God also remakes Avraham and Sarah’s identity in a way similar to Adam and Eve.

God's blessing on Avraham and Sarah

God's blessing on humanity, male and female

Gen. 17:2 “I will multiply (‫ )רבה‬you very very much”

Gen. 1:28 And Elohim blessed them, saying, “Be
fruitful (‫ )פרה‬and multiply (‫)רבה‬, fill the land and

Gen. 17:6 “I will make you fruitful (‫ )פרה‬very very

subdue it …”

much”
Gen. 17:16 “I will bless [Sarah]”

God re-names Avram and Sarai

Humanity is named, then renamed

Gen. 17:5 “No longer will your name be called,

Gen. 1:26 “Let us make ‘human’ (‫ )אדם‬in our image

‘Avram,’ but your name will be ‘Avraham,’ because I

… let them rule …”

will make you a father of a multitude of nations.”
Gen. 2:23 “She shall be called Woman (‫)אשה‬,
Gen. 17:15 “Sarai your wife, you will not call her

because she was taken out of man (‫)איש‬.”

name ‘Sarai,’ because her name is ‘Sarah.’”
Gen. 3:20 Now the man called his wife’s name
“Khavvah”(‫ )חוה‬because she was the mother of all
living (‫)חי‬.

Avraham and Sarah, Adam and Eve. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

In Adam and Eve’s story, she is named before their folly, and her name symbolizes the “two-in-one” union of
man/woman. After the folly, she is named based on her reproductive function in their relationship, “Mother of
All Living.”
In Avraham and Sarah’s story, both are renamed after their shared folly with Hagar. God will maintain his
promise to them, but only after “cutting of flesh” from Avraham’s genitals and marking them as belonging to
God. The new names signify the new, God-given identity that Avraham and Sarah now have. Their lives and
reproductive abilities belong wholly to God, and from them God will create a nation of seed and kings. Their
new names reflect this: Avraham means Father of a Multitude; Sarah means Queen (i.e., mother of kings).

Father and Mother of Many Nations: Yishmael and Yitskhaq

Class Notes: Abraham

113 of 230

This chapter carries forward the pattern of Yahweh selecting one chosen lineage from among a larger set of
siblings. Now that Avraham and Sarah have abused Hagar and produced Yishmael, they will become the
parents of a family made up of many nations, starting first with Yishmael.
This is one step in a larger design pattern that starts back with Cain and Abel.

Chosen for Covenant

Not Chosen

Resulting People Group

Abel + Seth

Cain

Kenites

Shem

Japheth, Ham

The island nations, Canaanites

Avraham

Nakhor, Lot

Moabites, Ammonites

Yitskhaq

Yishmael, sons of Qeturah

Ishmaelites, Midianites, eastern
tribes

Yaaqov

Esau

Edomites

Judah

11 brothers

Northern tribes

David

Saul

Benjaminite

Family of Judah

Northern tribes

Samaritans

Father and Mother of Many Nations. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Notice, however, that even though Yishmael is not chosen as the lineage of the covenant and royal seed, God
affirms that he will bless him and his family in precisely the language of the Eden blessing, but also in
anticipation of the later 12 sons of Yaakov (Jacob).
Genesis 17:20 Instructor’s Translation
Look, I am going to bless [Yishmael], and I will make him fruitful, very very much. He will become the father
of twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation.

Reflection Question
How is circumcision both an act of God’s judgment and and act of grace?

Class Notes: Abraham

114 of 230

