Session 1: Abraham and Sarah in the Biblical
Imagination

Key Takeaways
Jesus constantly appealed to the Hebrew Scriptures to talk about his identity and mission, and the
stories of Avraham and Sarah were an important part of this.
The rest of the Bible mentions Abraham and Sarah over 115 times, highlighting the crucial role they play
in the story of the Bible.
Mary saw God moving in her life and story as a continuation of the promises made to Avraham.

The Importance of Abraham and Sarah
Within the story of the Bible, there are few characters who rival the importance of Abraham and Sarah.
Abraham is mentioned in nearly every part of the Bible, and the story of his journey from Babylon to Canaan,
the tales of his failures and his faith, and the covenant promises that God makes to him are all foundational in
the biblical story and in both Jewish and Christian traditions.
The way their names are pronounced in English comes from the Greek spelling and pronunciation. The
original Hebrew pronunciation of their names is a bit different, and in the rest of these notes, their names will
appear based on the Hebrew and not the Greek.
Hebrew: ‫ אברהם‬/ ‫אברם‬, Avram/Avraham; ‫ שרה‬/ ‫שרי‬, Sarai/Sarah
Greek: Ἀβρααμ, Abraam; Σαρρας, Sarras
The following is just a sample of how later biblical authors recall the story of Avraham and Sarai.

God’s Covenant Promise to Avraham
Exodus 2:24 NIV
God heard their groaning and he remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob.
Leviticus 26:42 NIV
I will remember my covenant with Jacob and my covenant with Isaac and my covenant with Abraham, and I
will remember the land.
Numbers 32:11 NIV
Because they have not followed me wholeheartedly, not one of those who were twenty years old or more
when they came up out of Egypt will see the land I promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Class Notes: Abraham

5 of 230

Deuteronomy 1:8 NIV
See, I have given you this land. Go in and take possession of the land the LORD swore he would give to your
fathers—to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob—and to their descendants after them.

Avraham’s Journey to Canaan and God’s Blessing
Exodus 32:12-13 NIV
12

”Why should the Egyptians say, ‘It was with evil intent that he brought them out, to kill them in the

mountains and to wipe them off the face of the earth’? Turn from your fierce anger; relent and do not bring
disaster on your people.

13

Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac and Israel, to whom you swore by your

own self: ‘I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and I will give your descendants
all this land I promised them, and it will be their inheritance forever.’”
Joshua 24:2-3 NIV
2

Joshua said to all the people, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Long ago your ancestors,

including Terah the father of Abraham and Nahor, lived beyond the Euphrates River and worshiped other
gods.

3

But I took your father Abraham from the land beyond the Euphrates and led him throughout Canaan

and gave him many descendants.’”
Isaiah 51:2 NIV
... look to Abraham, your father, and to Sarai, who gave you birth. When I called him he was only one man,
and I blessed him and made him many.
Ezekiel 33:24 NIV
“Son of man, the people living in those ruins in the land of Israel are saying, ‘Abraham was only one man,
yet he possessed the land. But we are many; surely the land has been given to us as our possession.’”

Avraham’s Faith in God’s Promise
John 8:39 NASB
They answered and said to him, “Abraham is our father.” Jesus said to them, “If you are Abraham’s children,
do the deeds of Abraham.”
Romans 4:19-20 NASB
19

Without becoming weak in faith he contemplated his own body, now as good as dead since he was about

a hundred years old, and the deadness of Sarai’s womb;

20

yet, with respect to the promise of God, he did

not waver in unbelief but grew strong in faith, giving glory to God ...
Hebrews 11:8 NASB
By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed by going out to a place which he was to receive for an
inheritance; and he went out, not knowing where he was going.
Galatians 3:29 NASB

Class Notes: Abraham

6 of 230

And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s descendants, heirs according to promise.
Hebrews 11:11 NASB
By faith even Sarai herself received ability to conceive, even beyond the proper time of life, since she
considered him faithful who had promised.
James 2:21-22 NASB
21

Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?

22

You see

that faith was working with his works, and as a result of the works, faith was perfected ...

Isaiah 51 and the Avraham Story

Class Notes: Abraham

7 of 230

Class Notes: Abraham

8 of 230

Isaiah 51 and the Avraham Story. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham
(2021).

Reflection Question
How do Mary’s song in Luke 1 and God’s words through the prophet in Isaiah 51 describe the role of Avraham
and Sarah’s story in understanding God’s purposes in every age?

Class Notes: Abraham

9 of 230

