Session 6: Abram the Snake

Key Takeaways
Avram does not trust God and instead crafts a scheme that exposes Sarai to risk in order to preserve his
own life.
Rather than bringing blessing to the nations, Avram’s schemes bring curses upon the Egyptians.
This episode is set on analogy to Genesis 3 with Sarai in the role of the tree, Pharaoh and the Egyptians
in the role of the humans, and Avram in the role of the snake.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 12:10-20
Introduction: Avram Goes to Egypt Because of a Famine
a

10 Now there was a famine in the land ;

b
a'

and Avram went down to Egypt to sojourn there,

for the famine was severe in the land .

Avram Nears Egypt + Avram’s Speech to Sarai
11 And it came about when he came near to entering Egypt,

and he said to Sarai his wife,
“See now, I know that you are a woman beautiful of sight ;
12 and when the Egyptians see you , they will say , ‘ This is his wife ’;

and they will kill me, but they will let you live.
13 Please say that you are my sister so that there will be good to me on account of you ,

and that I may live on account of you.”

Egyptians See Sarai and Pharaoh Takes Her
14 And it came about when Avram came into Egypt,

and the Egyptians saw that the woman was very beautiful .
15 And Pharaoh’s officials saw her and praised her to Pharaoh;

and the woman was taken into Pharaoh’s house.
16 And he did good to Avram on account of her ;

and there was for him sheep and oxen and donkeys and male and female servants and female
donkeys and camels.

Plagues on Pharaoh + Pharaoh’s Speech to Avram

Class Notes: Abraham

42 of 230

17 And Yahweh plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues on account of Sarai, Avram’s wife .
18 And Pharaoh called Avram and he said,

“What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that

she was your wife ?

19 Why did you say , ‘ She is my sister, ’ so that I took her for my wife ?

Now then, here is your wife , take her and go.”

Conclusion: Avram Sent Away From Egypt by Pharaoh
20 And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him;

and they sent him away, with his wife and all that belonged to him.

Genesis 12:10-20. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Introduction to
the Hebrew Bible (2019).

Genesis 12:10
A - Introduction: Avram Goes to Egypt Because of a Famine

Genesis 12:11-13
B - Avram Nears Egypt + Avram's Speech to Sarai

• "I know that you are a woman )‫ (אשה‬beautiful of sight, very … Please say that you are my sister
)‫(אחתי‬."

Genesis 12:14-16
C - Egyptians See Sarai and Pharaoh Takes Her

Genesis 12:17-19
B' - Plagues on Pharaoh + Pharaoh's Speech to Avram

• "Why did you say ‘She is my sister )‫(אחתי‬,’ so that I took her to be my wife )‫”?(אשה‬
Genesis 12:20
A' - Conclusion: Avram Sent Away From Egypt by Pharaoh
Genesis 12:10-20. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

A Crisis of Faith
God just promised Avram that traveling to the land of Canaan will result in blessing, abundance, and
possession of the land, and this blessing will overflow into blessing for the nations. The first story we’re told

Class Notes: Abraham

43 of 230

after Avram’s obedient sojourn to Canaan is about Avram’s lack of trust and his deception of the nations that
leads to curse and plagues upon them.
However, Avram’s deception is motivated by an understandable feeling. After going to a land where he was
promised abundance, he discovers scarcity in a time of famine. The famine is Avram’s second test of faith. Will
he remain in the land and trust God, or will he make up his own plan and attempt to find blessing and
abundance by his own wisdom?

Avram’s “Wife-Sister” Plan
There is a cultural reason why Avram would come up with this specific scheme presenting Sarai as his sister.
First, it is a half-truth, as Avram admits in 20:12, because Sarai is his half-sister from his father’s side. Marrying
one’s step-sister was not uncommon in ancient Near Eastern cultures (in fact, it’s what Avram’s brother Nakhor
did, see 11:29). But second, by presenting himself as Sarai’s brother, Avram was using a common cultural
convention as an attempt to save his life and Sarai’s.
“In the ancient Near East there was a well-known socio-legal institution of ‘fratriarchy’ that existed over a
long period of time. Where there is no father, the brother assumes legal guardianship of his sister,
particularly with respect to obligations and responsibilities in arranging marriage on her behalf. Therefore,
whoever wished to take Sarai to wife would have to negotiate with her ‘brother.’ In this way, Abram could
gain time to plan escape. Of course, this went awry when the Egyptian turned out to be Pharaoh himself.”
Sarna, Nahum M. (2001). The JPS Torah Commentary: Genesis. Jewish Publication Society. 95.
From this angle, Avram’s motivations appear both clever and foolish, but not malicious. His initial plan was
aimed at preserving his and Sarai’s lives, because any Egyptian who proposed to Sarai would have to respect
her brother. If he were known as her husband, he would more likely be the object of jealousy. This helps us
see that Genesis 12:14 actually vindicates Avram’s plan, as Egyptians see her. So far so good. But his plan does
not account for the possibility that the king of all the land might “see” and “take" Sarai.

Avram the Snake
Genesis 12:10-20 is Avram’s “Eden failure.” The entire episode is set on analogy with the the snake’s deception
of Adam and Eve. The analogies are surprising and offer important commentary on the character’s motives
and actions.

Avram’s Deception in Genesis 12:10-20

The Snake’s Deception in Genesis 3

Avram relies on his knowledge of what will happen

Adam and Eve seek their own knowledge of good

in Egypt instead of trusting God’s promise

and bad, instead of trusting God’s command

Gen. 12:11-12 “I know (‫ )ידע‬that a woman (‫)אשה‬

Gen. 3:6 The woman (‫האשה‬, Eve [‫ )]חוה‬saw (‫ראה‬

Avram the Snake. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Class Notes: Abraham

44 of 230

Avram’s Deception in Genesis 12:10-20

The Snake’s Deception in Genesis 3

beautiful of sight (‫ )מראה‬you are … and they will

) the tree of knowing (‫ )ידע‬good (‫ )טוב‬and evil,

see you (‫ … )ראה‬and kill me and let you live (‫)חיה‬.”

and it was desirable to the eyes .

Avram’s deception results in “good” at the expense

Adam and Eve’s actions result in “curse” on the

of Sarai, resulting in plagues on Pharaoh

ground

Gen. 12:13 “Say you’re my sister, so that it may be

Gen. 3:17 Cursed is the ground on account of

good (‫)יטב‬, on account of you (‫)בעבורך‬, and I will

you (‫)בעבורך‬.

live (‫)חיה‬.”
Gen. 12:17 And Yahweh sent plagues upon
Pharaoh, on account of Sarai .

Avram presents his wife as a “tree of testing” to

The snake presents the “tree of testing” to the

the Egyptians

humans

Gen. 12:14-15 And the Egyptians saw (‫ )ראה‬the

Gen. 3:6 And the woman (‫ )האשה‬saw (‫ )ראה‬that

woman (‫)האשה‬, that she was beautiful, very …

good (‫ )טוב‬was the tree for eating, and desirable

and she was taken (‫ )לקח‬to the house of Pharaoh.

to the eyes … and she took (‫”… )לקח‬

Gen. 12:17 And Yahweh struck/touched (‫)נגע‬

Gen. 3:3 “From the tree that is in the middle of the

Pharaoh with great strikes (‫)נגעים‬.

garden we cannot eat from it or touch it (‫”)נגע‬

Pharaoh holds Avram accountable for his

God holds Adam and Eve accountable for their

deception

action

Gen. 12:18 And Pharaoh called out to (‫ ל‬... ‫)ויקרא‬

Gen. 3:9 And Yahweh called out to (‫ אל‬... ‫)ויקרא‬

Avram and said "What is this you have done (

the man …

‫ )מה זאת עשית‬to me? You didn’t tell (‫ )נגד‬me that
she was your wife.”

Gen. 3:13 And Yahweh said to the woman, "What
is this you have done (‫”?)מה זאת עשית‬
Gen. 3:11 “Who told (‫ )נגד‬you that you were
naked?”

Pharaoh exiles Avram

God exiles Adam and Eve

Gen. 12:20 And Pharaoh commanded (‫ … )ויצו‬and

Gen. 2:16 And Yahweh commanded (‫ )ויצו‬the

sent him away (‫)שלח‬.

human …

Avram the Snake. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Class Notes: Abraham

45 of 230

Avram’s Deception in Genesis 12:10-20

The Snake’s Deception in Genesis 3
Gen. 3:23 And Yahweh sent away (‫ )שלח‬the
human from the garden of Eden.

Avram the Snake. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Implications of These Analogies
Avram is depicted on analogy to the shrewd snake. He is crafty, and he is able to use his circumstances to his
own advantage, but at the expense of others. Avram’s decision to lie puts Sarai in danger while also bringing
plagues upon Pharaoh. In this scene, Avram’s prosperity (= blessing) comes precisely through the suffering of
the others.
Sarai’s beauty is set in relationship to the beauty of the tree of testing in the garden of Eden. A good thing
becomes co-opted by deceivers and used for their own advantage.
Notice that Pharaoh’s role in the story activates two analogies.
1. Pharaoh on analogy to Adam and Eve: Pharaoh is innocent, yet he still commits wrong. While his
"taking" of a woman is certainly an exercise in patriarchal power and privilege, he is portrayed as
faultless in terms of his motives. But his innocent motives don’t erase the fact that he’s taking another
man’s wife.
2. Pharaoh on analogy to God: After Pharaoh finds out about Avram’s deception, he takes on the divine
role of holding Avram accountable.

God’s Promise and God’s Justice
This story presents an uncomfortable portrait of God’s relationship to the nations. God defends the deceiver
in this story and brings judgment on someone who has acted wrongly but without wrong motives. This
chapter begins a long drama of tension between God’s covenant promises to the family of Avraham and the
divine character traits of justice and equity.
God just promised to “bless those who bless you and curse those who treat you as cursed.” In this story we
see God protecting Avram even though he doesn’t deserve it. God’s promises place him in a morally
inconvenient situation.
“[Abram’s behavior] would appear to put Yahweh in somewhat of a bind ... Yahweh must decide whether
and how to take Abram’s side when problems arise with others—even when the conflict arises from Abram’s
less-than-honest behavior. Pharaoh treats Abram honorably and generously, but Yahweh evidently decides
that having a human friend in a wicked world requires a thoroughgoing commitment to the welfare of that
individual, even when it works against the welfare of others. Standing with someone inevitably leads to
standing against someone else. Yahweh, therefore, strikes Pharaoh and his household, even thought the
mess was made by Abram ... This first act of divine violence after the flood is momentous, as it is directed

Class Notes: Abraham

46 of 230

toward people who have not, to the best of their knowledge, acted wickedly, for the sake of demonstrating
solidarity with the family Yahweh has befriended.”
Hawk, L. Daniel (2019). The Violence of the Biblical God. Eerdmans. 48-49.

Avram’s Egyptian Plunder
This story also sets up a number of themes that will be developed in future episodes.
Avram’s lack of trust in God’s protection and promise. This will be addressed again in chapter 15.
Avram’s short-sighted schemes to get or retain God’s blessing by his own wisdom. This will replay itself
again in chapters 16, 21, and 22.
Avram’s “plunder” consists of animal flocks and slaves, both of which will cause problems in later
stories.
Genesis 12:16 Instructor’s Translation
And [Pharaoh] did good to Avram on account of her;
and there was for him sheep and oxen and donkeys (the source of problems in Gen. 13)
and male and female servants (the source of problems in Gen. 16)
and female donkeys and camels (the source of problems in Gen. 13).

Reflection Question
How does the Genesis 12:10-20 mirror Genesis 3? How does this help us understand the meaning of this
story?

Class Notes: Abraham

47 of 230

