Session 9: A Flood of Violence

Key Takeaways
The kings of Genesis 14:1-10 are portrayed as personifications of evil and corruption through their
names and other symbolism.
The kings eliminated the groups of giants, recalling the Nephillim whose violence ruined the land and
brought on the flood.
Avram’s dramatic rescue of Lot is depicted as miraculous, validating Avram’s status as God’s chosen
agent.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 14:1-16

a 1 And it came about in the days of Amraphel , king
b of Aryok , king

of Shinar ,

of Elasar ,

c of Kedorlaomer , king

of Elam ,

d and of Tidal , king of Goyyim (= “nations”),
a 2 that they made war with Bera (= “in evil”), king
a' and with Birsha (= “in wickedness), king

of Sodom ,

of Gomorrah ,

b and with Shinab (= “father hater”), king

of Admah ,

b' and with Shemeved (= “name of destruction”), king
c and with the

king

of Tsiboyim ,

of Bela (= “devour”) [this is Zoar].

3 All of these joined together in the valley of Siddim [this is the Sea of Salt]

a 4 For twelve years they had been slaves of Kedorlaomer ,
a' and in the thirteenth year they rebelled,
b 5 and in the fourteenth year Kedorlaomer

went ,

b' and the kings who were with him,
a and they struck the Rephaim in Ashteroth-Qarnayim (= “Asherah of Twin-Peaks”)
a' and the Zuzim in Ham,
a'' and the Emim in Shaveh-Qiryathayim (= “the Plain of Twin-Cities”),
b 6 and the Horites in the mountains of Seir,
b' unto the Oak of Paran which is by the wilderness.
c

7 And they returned and they went to Eyn-Mishpat (= “the Spring of Judgment”) [this is

Qadesh]
and they struck all the field of the Amalekites ,

c'

Class Notes: Abraham

60 of 230

c
c'' and also the Amorites who dwell in Hatzetzon-Tamar (= “Heap of Palms”)

a 8 And the king of Sodom went out,
b and the king of Gomorrah ,
b and the king of Admah ,
b and the king of Tsiboyim ,
b and the king of Bela [this is Zoar]
a' and they lined themselves up for war in the valley of Siddim ,
a 9 against Kedorlaomer, king of Elam ,
b and Tidal, king of Goyyim
b and Amraphel, king of Shinar ,
b and Aryok, king of Elasar .
c Four kings against five.
a 10 Now, the valley of Siddim was full of many pits of tar.
b And they fled,
c

the king of Sodom, and Gomorrah ,

b' and they fell into there.
a And those remaining fled to the mountains .

11 And they took

all the possessions of Sodom and Gomorrah ,
and all their food ,
and they went away.
12 And they took

Lot and his possessions ,
the son of the brother of Avram,
and they went away.
Now, he was dwelling in

Sodom .

a 13 And a refugee came and reported to Avram the Hebrew .
b

Now, he was dwelling among the oaks of Mamre the Amorite,

b the brother of Eshkol, and the brother of Aner.
b Now, they were members of a covenant with Avram.
a' 14 And Avram heard that his brother had been taken captive .

a And he brought out his trained men,
b those born of his house,
b' three hundred and eighteen,
a'

and he chased them unto Dan.

Class Notes: Abraham

61 of 230

a 15 And he divided himself against them by night,
b he and his servants
a' and he struck them,
a''

and he chased them unto Khobah, which is north of Damascus,

a 16 and he returned all the possessions ,
a' and also Lot his brother and his possessions he returned,
b and also the women and the people.

Genesis 14:1-24. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Of Kings and Giants
The story highlights these repeated lists of kings. The lists are arranged in symmetrical patterns, and the
names of the kings are loaded with sarcastic wordplays.

Mesopotamian and Canaanite Kings Lists. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

The list of nine kings is repeated two times, but not identically. The order of the four Mesopotamian kings is
inverted so that the king of Shinar is number one in the first list, and the king of Elam is number one in the
second list.

Class Notes: Abraham

62 of 230

This seemingly random variation becomes meaningful when the story is mapped out in its literary sequence.

A - Amraphel, king of Shinar
B - Aryok, king of Elasar

C - Kedorlaomer, king of Elam
D - Tidal, king of Goyim

A - Bera king of Sodom
B - Birsha, king of Gomorrah
C - Shinav, king of Admah
D - Shemeved, king of Tsevoyim
E - the king of Bela [this is Zoar]

Kedorlaomer and the Kings With Him Strike the Giant Clans

• Rephaim / Zuzim / Emim
• Horites / Amalekites / Amorites

A - the king of Sodom
B - the king of Gomorrah
C - the king of Admah
D - the king of Tsevoyim
E - the king of Bela [this is Zoar]

C - Kedorlaomer, king of Elam
D - Tidal, king of Goyim

A - Amraphel, king of Shinar
B - Aryok, king of Elasar

Genesis 14:1-10 Kings. Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

The names have been listed in symmetrical pattern, which places the Mesopotamian kings at the outer
locations and highlights the giant clans in the center position. Each of these design features seems intentional
and communicates something significant.
The inverted Mesopotamian kings: The two kings highlighted are the rulers of Shinar and Elam. Both
kingdoms play a significant role in the larger biblical story.

Class Notes: Abraham

63 of 230

Shinar
Shinar was last mentioned in Genesis 11:1-2, in the genealogy of Ham, son of Noah: “And all the land …
journeyed east and found a plain in the land of Shinar and they settled there” and began building Babylon.
Shinar is a rare term used to describe the flood plain in which Babylon and its ziggurats were built. Every
times it appears in the Hebrew Bible, it is ominous:
“The beginning of Nimrod’s kingdom was Babylon … in the land of Shinar” (Gen. 10:10)
“On that day, Yahweh will a second time with his arm restore the remnant of his people from Assyria,
Egypt … Elam, Shinar … and from the islands of the sea.” (Isaiah 11:11)
“[Nebuchadnezzar] brought the vessels of the temple of Elohim to the land of Shinar, into the treasury
of his elohim.” (Daniel 1:2)

Elam
“Elam” is the Hebrew word for “Persia,” and was last mentioned in the genealogy of Shem, son of Noah: “The
sons of Shem: Elam, Ashur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram” (Gen. 10:22).
Interestingly, Elam/Persia is the nation that topples Babylon and becomes the instrument of God to restore
the exiled Israelites back to the promised land (see Ezra 1:1-11).
Later, the king of Babylon (descendant of Ham) will exile Avram’s descendants to the land of Shinar, and Elam
(son of Shem) is the nation that will restore those exiles back to their homeland.
The list of Canaanite kings is repeated identically, and most of of the names come from the genealogy of Ham
in Genesis 10.
Genesis 10:6, 19 NASB
6

The sons of Ham were Cush and Mizraim and Put and Canaan. ...

19

The territory of the Canaanite

extended from Sidon as you go toward Gerar, as far as Gaza; as you go toward Sodom and Gomorrah and
Admah and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha.
This precise linking of the kings to the list of Noah’s sons in Genesis 10 is intentional. The author is trying to
show that this battle is an outworking of the sibling rivalry that Noah anticipated in Genesis 9:25-26.
Genesis 9:24-26 NIV
24

When Noah awoke from his wine and found out what his youngest son had done to him,

25

he said,

“Cursed be Canaan!
The lowest of slaves
will he be to his brothers.”
26

He also said,

“Praise be to the LORD, the God of Shem!
May Canaan be the slave of Shem."
Genesis 14:4-5 Instructor’s Translation

Class Notes: Abraham

64 of 230

4

For twelve years [the sons of Ham] had been slaves of Kedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they

rebelled,

5

and in the fourteenth year Kedorlaomer came, and the kings who were with him [sons of Shem]

The Mesopotamian Kings Versus the Giants
The eastern kings come to Canaan and strike the giant clans associated with the Nephilim, the giant warriors
from the time of the flood.

Rephaim in Ashteroth Qarnaim
The Rephaim were a clan of giants, with a king named Og who ruled in Ashteroth, in the region of Bashan on
the east side of the Jordan River.
Deuteronomy 3:8-11 ESV
8

So we took the land at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the

Jordan, from the Valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon ...
all Bashan ... cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

11

10

all the cities of the tableland and all Gilead and

(For only Og the king of Bashan was left of the

remnant of the Rephaim. Behold, his bed was a bed of iron. Is it not in Rabbah of the Ammonites? Nine
cubits was its length, and four cubits its breadth, according to the common cubit.)
Joshua 13:12 ESV
all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (he alone was left of the remnant of
the Rephaim); these Moses had struck and driven out.
The Greek Septuagint translators of Genesis rendered the Rephaim of Genesis 14:5 with the Greek word
gigantas (γιγαντας) = “giants,” the same word they use to translate “Nephilim” in Genesis 6:4.

The Zuzim )‫ (זוזים‬in Ham
The Zuzim, also known as the “Zamzummim” )‫(זמזמים‬, lived in the region later inhabited by the Ammonites,
who were actually part of the Rephaim giant clans.
Deuteronomy 2:19-21 ESV
19

" ... I will not give you any of the land of the people of Ammon as a possession … "

20

It is also counted as a

land of Rephaim. Rephaim formerly lived there—but the Ammonites call them Zamzummim—

21

a people

great and many, and tall as the Anakim; but the LORD destroyed them before the Ammonites, and they
dispossessed them and settled in their place

The Emim in Shaveh-Qiryataim
The Emim were also actually part of the Rephaim giant clans.
Deuteronomy 2:10-11 ESV

Class Notes: Abraham

65 of 230

10

The Emim formerly lived there, a people great and many, and tall as the Anakim.

11

Like the Anakim they

are also counted as Rephaim, but the Moabites call them Emim.
All of these tribes are connected to the Anakim and the Nephilim from the time of the flood.
Numbers 13:27-33 ESV
27

And they told him, “We came to the land to which you sent us. It flows with milk and honey, and this is its

fruit.

28

However, the people who dwell in the land are strong, and the cities are fortified and very large.

And besides, we saw the descendants of Anak there.

29

The Amalekites dwell in the land of the Negeb. The

Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the hill country. And the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and
along the Jordan." …

32

"The land, through which we have gone to spy it out, is a land that devours its

inhabitants, and all the people that we saw in it are of great height.

33

And there we saw the Nephilim (the

sons of Anak, who come from the Nephilim), and we seemed to ourselves like grasshoppers, and so we
seemed to them.”
This entire list of the inhabitants of Canaan and the Transjordan provides an accounting for all the regions that
the Israelites will later enter in Numbers 20 onward. These regions were filled with earlier inhabitants, clans of
giants who were dealt with by God’s providential justice long before Israel entered into the land.
Deuteronomy 2:9-11, 18-23 ESV
9

And the LORD said to me, "Do not harass Moab or contend with them in battle, for I will not give you any

of their land for a possession, because I have given Ar to the people of Lot for a possession."
formerly lived there, a people great and many, and tall as the Anakim.
counted as Rephaim, but the Moabites call them Emim.

11

10

(The Emim

Like the Anakim they are also

12

The Horites also lived in Seir formerly, but the

people of Esau dispossessed them and destroyed them from before them and settled in their place, as
Israel did to the land of their possession, which the LORD gave to them.)
18

"Today you are to cross the border of Moab at Ar.

19

And when you approach the territory of the people of

Ammon, do not harass them or contend with them, for I will not give you any of the land of the people of
Ammon as a possession, because I have given it to the sons of Lot for a possession."

20

(It is also counted as

a land of Rephaim. Rephaim formerly lived there—but the Ammonites call them Zamzummim—

21

a people

great and many, and tall as the Anakim; but the LORD destroyed them before the Ammonites, and they
dispossessed them and settled in their place,

22

as he did for the people of Esau, who live in Seir, when he

destroyed the Horites before them and they dispossessed them and settled in their place even to this day.
23

As for the Avvim, who lived in villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came from Caphtor, destroyed

them and settled in their place.)
Moses’ speech in Deuteronomy 2 assumes a backstory of God’s judgment on the giant clans on the east side
of the Jordan, and Genesis 14 supplies that narrative. The point of Moses’ speech is that just as God
providentially gave other lands to the non-chosen descendants and relatives of Avraham (Lot or Esau), so also
he will use the Israelites to dispossess the Canaanites. Genesis 14 provides the providential backstory,
implying that God used the eastern kings led by Babylon as a divine instrument of judgment on the giant
clans of Canaan and Transjordan. However, because of Babylon’s over-assertion in the capturing of Lot, the
seed of Avraham, God then delivers the coalition over to Avraham.

Class Notes: Abraham

66 of 230

This chapter, then, makes Avram the superior to the eastern kings, the Canaanites, and all the giants of the
ancient time. It also qualifies Avram to be the true inheritor of these very lands, because he was their
deliverer.
This all seems aligned with a strategy that sets the returnees from exile on analogy with Avraham. They too
(re)entered “Canaan” (= Persian Yehud) after God had used Babylon to judge the previous inhabitants (the
Israelites and Judean kingdoms along with the non-Israelite population), and found themselves called to
inherit it according to God’s promise.

A Flood of Violence
Recall that Genesis 11-14 retraces the thematic sequence of Genesis 1-9, and Genesis 14 comes at the
precisely the moment we are expecting a flood/re-creation moment. The story is filled with unique
connections to the onset of the flood narrative.

Genesis 6-8

Genesis 14:1-24

The mighty violent warriors (Heb. gibborim), also

• The Mesopotamian kings strike the Rephaim and

called “Nephilim, men of the name” (notice the

other giant clans (Gen. 14:5, LXX γιγαντας),

prominence of names in this chapter) spill much

connected to the Anakim (Deut. 2:10-11, 3:11-13)

blood on the land, filling it with violence.

and the Nephilim (Num. 13:33).

Gen. 6:4 The Nephilim were on the earth in those

• The Mesopotamian kings become a flood of

days, and also afterward, when the sons of God

divine judgment that consists of warriors

came in to the daughters of men, and they bore
children to them. Those were the mighty men

(gibborim) sweeping through the land promised to
Avram, clearing out its previous inhabitants.

who were of old, men of the name.

Gen. 6:13 Then God said to Noah, “The end of all
flesh has come before me; for the earth is filled
with violence because of them; and behold, I am
about to cause their ruin them with the land.

The flood-waters are called “mighty and strong”
(Heb. gavar, ‫)גבר‬, from the same root as “mighty
warrior” (Heb. gibbor, ‫)גבור‬.
Gen. 7:18-20
18

The water was mighty (Heb. gavar, ‫ )גבר‬and

increased greatly upon the land …

Mesopotamian Kings As a Flood of Violence. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham
(2021).

Class Notes: Abraham

67 of 230

Genesis 6-8
19

Genesis 14:1-24

The water was mighty (Heb. gavar, ‫)גבר‬, very

very much upon the land, and all the high hills
under the skies were covered.
20

The water was mighty (Heb. gavar, ‫ )גבר‬fifteen

cubits higher, and the mountains were covered.

Gen. 7:11 The flood happens as the “fountains of

The kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fall into pits of

the deep abyss” split open, and the “windows"

pitch.

(Heb. ’arubbot, ‫ )ארבת‬open up.
Gen. 14:10 Now, the valley of Siddim has pits, pits
Gen. 11:3 The tower and city of Babylon, which

(‫ )בארת בארת‬of tar (‫)חמר‬.

were scattered in a flood-like judgment, were built
by “tar” (‫ )חמר‬used as mortar.

After the flood, Noah and his family are a remnant

After the flood-like attack of the kings, the

(‫שאר‬/‫)נשאר‬, and they escape and are placed upon

survivors flee to the mountains.

the “mountains of Ararat.”
Gen. 14:10 ... and those left remaining fled to the
Gen. 7:23 “Only Noah, together with those with

mountains (‫)הר‬.

him in the ark, was left remaining (‫)נשאר‬.
Gen. 8:4 “In the seventh month … the ark rested
upon the mountains (‫ )הר‬of Ararat”

Gen. 8:21 After the flood, God refers to the waters

The Mesopotamian kings come and “strike” (‫)נכה‬

as a “strike” upon the land (‫“ — )נכה‬I will never

the giant clans.

again strike (‫ )נכה‬the land as I have done.
Gen. 14:5, 7 Khedorlaomer came … and struck (

‫ )נכה‬the Rephaim … and they struck (‫ )נכה‬the field
of the Amalekites.

God makes a covenant promise to Noah, that he

Gen. 14:13 While the battle rages around Avram,

will provide a refuge for him and his family in the

he sits in peace among the oak trees of Mamre.

ark built of trees (‫)עץ‬, where he can live in safety
with the animals and plenty of food.

Gen. 14:13 While corrupt Canaanites are being
struck all around, a group of Canaanites who are in

Gen. 6:14 “Make for yourself an ark of gopher

a covenant (‫ )ברית‬with Avram, sitting with him, are

trees (‫… )עץ‬

perfectly safe

Gen. 6:18-19 “But I will set up my covenant (‫)ברית‬

Gen. 14:11-12 The Mesopotamian kings come and

with you and so you will enter the ark, you and

Mesopotamian Kings As a Flood of Violence. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham
(2021).

Class Notes: Abraham

68 of 230

Genesis 6-8

Genesis 14:1-24

your sons and your wives and your sons wives and

“take” (‫ )לקח‬both the “food” (‫ )אכל‬and Lot from

every living thing of all flesh … in order to keep

Sodom.

them alive with you.”
Gen. 6:21 “And take (‫ )לקח‬for yourself food (‫)מאכל‬
that you will eat (‫ )אכל‬and gather it for yourself.”

Gen. 5:21, 28-29 Noah is the great-grandson of

Gen. 14:14 Avram prepares his “ dedicated men ” (

Enoch ( ‫) חנ ו ך‬

‫) חנ י כ יו‬.

Gen. 5:29 Noah ( ‫" … ) נח‬this one will comfort us (

‫ )י נח מנו‬us"
Gen. 6:8 But Noah ( ‫ ) נח‬found favor (‫ )חן‬in the
eyes of Yahweh

Mesopotamian Kings As a Flood of Violence. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham
(2021).

These hyperlinks establish Avram, the seed of Noah, as a new Noah who is delivered from the Mesopotamian
kings’ flood of violence and who becomes the agent of God’s deliverance and judgment.
Avram is the agent of God’s deliverance because the Canaanites who are in a covenant with him are delivered
and safe from the Mesopotamian attack.
Avram is the agent of God’s judgment because he and the Canaanites with him strike back against the
Mesopotamian kings, overcoming them and rescuing the captives of Sodom.
In this story, the cursed Canaanites are struck by wicked kings of the east, who are depicted as a flood of
wickedness. While God’s providence is not explicitly evoked, it does appear to be a judgment on the
Canaanites, who, by extension from Sodom and Gomorrah’s “great evil and sin” (Gen. 13:13), deserve divine
justice. But, in contrast to the flood, the violent kings of the east come led by Babylon. This prepares us for
the portrait of Babylon as God’s “servant” in Jeremiah 25, who will be used for a time (paralleling Gen. 14:1-10)
until he oversteps his bounds (paralleling Gen. 14:11-24) and becomes the object of God’s judgment instead of
its instrument.

Avram the Hebrew and His Covenant With the Canaanites
The Canaanites are portrayed in two ways.
1. The Canaanites unconnected to Avram are swept away in the battle of the kings who come, strike, and
return. Their “wicked” status is indicated by the names of the kings: “In Evil,” “In Wickedness,” “Father

Class Notes: Abraham

69 of 230

Hater,” "Name of Destruction,” and “Devoured.” These are the Canaanites associated with Avram and
Lot.
2. The good Canaanites (Mamre, Aner, Eshkol) hanging out with Avram in his mini-Eden are associated
with Avram by covenant. Not only are they spared, but they go with Avram and defeat the violent
nations themselves, chasing them all the way “unto Dan” )‫(עד דן‬, which sounds like the Hebrew for “unto
Eden.” Note that Eshkol )‫ (אשכל‬means “Grape Cluster,” which is a garden image.

Avram the Commando King-Slayer
This portrait of Avram as the guerrilla warrior is unique in the Avram stories because he is usually peaceable
and non-violent in his relationships with the Canaanites. His fighting force of 318 is an odd detail, explained by
its relation to Eliezer in the next story.

A Flood of Warrior Kings

Flood of Warrior Kings. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Reflection Question
How do the violent kings of Genesis 14 replay the flood theme? How does this help us understand the
importance of this episode in Avram’s story?

Class Notes: Abraham

70 of 230

