Session 7: Abram and Lot Separate

Key Takeaways
Avram’s ill-gotten wealth becomes the source of conflict, causing him to part ways with Lot.
Lot is enticed by a false Eden and chooses what is good in his own eyes.
The separation of Avram and Lot is set on analogy to the failure narratives of Genesis 3, 4, and 6.
The separation of the brothers motif is the Bible’s way of exploring communal sin.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 13:1-4

a 1 And Avram went up out of Egypt,
b he and his wife
b and all that belonged to him ,
b and Lot with him,
a'

to the Negev.

a 2 And Avram was very heavy
b with herds
b and with silver
b and with gold ,

a 3 and he went on his journeys from the Negev and unto Beth-El (= house of El)
b unto the place where his tent was there at the first ,
c between Beth-El and between Ai,
b' 4 to the place of the altar which he built there

at the beginning ,

a' and Avram called there on the name of Yahweh .

Genesis 13:1-4. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Avram’s Exodus From Egypt ... With Lot
The scene opens with Avram’s ascent (literally “he went up” ‫ (עלה‬from Egypt with much wealth. Multiple links
back to 12:5-9 show us that Yahweh’s deliverance has restored him to his former estate.

Avram’s Entry Into the Land

Class Notes: Abraham

48 of 230

Genesis 12:5, 8-9 Instructor’s Translation
5

And Avram took Sarai his wife,

and Lot the son of his brother,
and all the possessions they came to possess …
and they went to the land of Canaan.
8

And he moved on )‫ (ויעתק‬from there

to the hill from the east of Beth-El
and he spread out his tent
Beth-El on the west
and Ai from the East
and he built there an altar to Yahweh
and he called upon the name of Yahweh.
9

And Avram journeyed )‫(ויסע‬,

continually journeying )‫ (נסוע‬to the Negev.

Avram’s Reentry Into the Land
Genesis 13:1, 3-4 Instructor’s Translation
1

And Avram went up out of Egypt,

he and his wife,
and all that belonged to him,
and Lot with him,
to the Negev.
3

And he went on his journeys from the Negev,

even unto Beth-El,
unto the place where his tent was there at the first,
between Beth-El and between Ai,
4

to the place of the altar which he built there at the beginning,

and Avram called there on the name of Yahweh.
Lot’s presence with Avram’s company was mentioned back in 12:5, and he remained in the background for all
of 12:6-9 and 12:10-20. Lot’s problematic presence is reintroduced here because he will play the key role in the
narrative to follow.
There is another key difference between Avram’s descent and ascent from Egypt. Avram is extremely wealthy
now, and that wealth, gained from his deception of Pharaoh, is also going to play a major role in the next
narrative.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 13:5-11

5 Now, also belonging to Lot ,

a

who went with Avram ,

Class Notes: Abraham

49 of 230

a

were flocks and cattle and tents ,
b 6 and the land could not carry them for dwelling together as one (‫ )יחדו‬,
a' because their possessions were so many (‫ )רב‬,
b' and they were not able to dwell together as one (‫ )יחדו‬.
a 7 And there was a dispute (‫)ריב‬
b between the shepherds of the herd of

Avram

b' and between the shepherds of the herd of

Lot

c (now, the Canaanites and the Perizzites were then dwelling in the land ).

8 And Avram said to Lot ,

a “Don’t let there be disputing (‫)מריבה‬
b between me and between you ,
b' between my shepherds and between your shepherds ,
a' for we men are brothers! (‫)אח‬
9 Isn’t all the land before you?

Please, separate from me !
If you go left/north, I will go right/south,
and if you go right/south, I will go left/north."

a 10 And Lot lifted his eyes,

and he saw all the valley of the

Jordan ,

that it was entirely watered
b

(this is before Yahweh caused the ruin of Sodom and Gomorrah)

it was like the

garden of Yahweh,

a' like the land of Egypt

as you go to Zoar .
a 11 And Lot chose for himself all the valley of the

Jordan ,

a' and Lot journeyed eastward,
b and each man separated from his brother .

Genesis 13:5-11. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

The Division of the Brothers
The developing conflict between Avram and Lot happens in steps that are carefully marked in the text’s
progression.
We’re told that Lot also has many herds, alongside Avram’s many herds. This leads to a problem of capacity.
The land simply can’t sustain all of their grazing cattle. “It cannot carry them for dwelling together as one.”
Notice the additional reason for the land’s inability to sustain Avram and Lot’s herds: They are not the only
ones grazing their cattle in this land. The Canaanites also dwell in the land. The symmetrical design of the
paragraph delays the information about the Canaanites while also linking it back up to the inability of Lot and
Avram to live together.

Class Notes: Abraham

50 of 230

However, the land’s inability isn’t the only reason for the conflict. There is also the matter of their
“possessions.” There is an important wordplay with the description of the “many” )‫רב‬, rav) possessions, which
leads to a “dispute” )‫ריב‬, riv) between the brothers. Specifically, the dispute is between the shepherds of each
party, i.e., between those who are not brothers.

Avram’s Solution and the Promised Land at Risk
Genesis 13:8-9 Instructor’s Translation
8

And Avram said to Lot,

“Don’t let there be disputing
between me and between you,
between my shepherds and between your shepherds,
for we men are brothers!
9

Isn’t all the land before you?

Please, separate from me!
If you go left/north, I will go right/south,
and if you go right/south, I will go left/north."
Avram’s speech is an attempt to avoid escalating conflict, and a subtle wordplay with the preceding
paragraph shows the narrative’s emphasis.
Genesis 13:6 Instructor’s Translation
and the land could not carry them for dwelling together as one )‫(יחדו‬, because their possessions were so
many )‫(רב‬, and they weren’t able to dwell together as one )‫(יחדו‬
“dwell together as one” = Heb. yakhdav

Genesis 13:11 Instructor’s Translation
and each man separated from his brother )‫(אחיו‬
“his brother” = Heb. ’akhiv

Genesis 13:8 Instructor’s Translation
“Don’t let there be disputing )‫ (מריבה‬between me and between you, between my shepherds and your
shepherds, for we men are brothers!” )‫(אחים‬
“brothers” = Heb. ’akhim

Avram names the sad reality that even though they are brothers, they are not able to dwell together as one
because their many possessions have created jealousy, contention, and division. And so his solution is both
generous and risky. He lets Lot have his choice of grazing lands first.

Class Notes: Abraham

51 of 230

Lot Saw That It Was Good … and He Took
The depiction of Lot choosing his ideal grazing land is full of hyperlinks back to Genesis 1-11, and these links
help the reader evaluate his actions.
Genesis 13:10-11 Instructor’s Translation
10

And Lot lifted his eyes,

and he saw all the valley of the Jordan,
that it was entirely watered
(this is before Yahweh caused the ruin of Sodom and Gomorrah)
it was like the garden of Yahweh,
like the land of Egypt
as you go to Zoar.
11

And Lot chose for himself all the valley of the Jordan,

and Lot journeyed eastward,
and each man separated from his brother.
Genesis 3:6 Instructor’s Translation
And the woman saw the tree, that it was good for eating, that it was desirable to the eyes, and she took
from its fruit and she ate …
Genesis 3:24 Instructor’s Translation
And [Yahweh] banished the human, and stationed kheruvim at the east of the garden of Eden …
Genesis 6:2 Instructor’s Translation
And the sons of elohim saw the daughter of humanity, that they were good, and they took for themselves
wives, from all that they chose.

Lot and Eve
Lot’s decision is set on analogy to Eve’s foolish choice to do what was good in her eyes. Just as her evaluation
of what was good was faulty and led to death, Lot’s choice of what appeared to be Eden also turns out to be
misguided. In Eve’s case, this led to exile to the east of Eden, and in Lot’s case, it leads to a self-imposed
“exile” from the Eden-like promised land.

Lot and the Sons of Elohim
The sons of elohim invert the folly of Eve as they see, take, and choose for themselves what is good in their
eyes. Lot does the same thing, but not in relation to women. Rather, what he sees, takes, and chooses is an
Eden-like land. And ironically, the place he chooses is the very city where Genesis 6:2 will be inverted! In
Sodom, human men will try to have sex with angels, and Lot himself will take his good-looking daughters and
try to give them to these men! It’s a tragic portrait of how selfish choices have a cascading effect that builds in
intensity and scope.

Class Notes: Abraham

52 of 230

Brothers and Waters Separate Outside of Eden
The use of the word “separate” (Heb. parad, ‫ (פרד‬to describe the sibling rivalry and division between Avram
and Lot sets up analogies to the earlier story of division between Cain and Abel, and between the sons of
Noah, and, surprisingly, between the river of Eden.
Genesis 13:10-11 Instructor’s Translation
10

And Lot lifted his eyes,

and he saw all the valley of the Jordan,
that it was entirely watered
(this is before Yahweh caused the ruin of Sodom and Gomorrah)
it was like the garden of Yahweh,
like the land of Egypt
as you go to Zoar.
11

And Lot chose for himself all the valley of the Jordan,

and Lot journeyed eastward,
and each man separated from his brother.
Genesis 2:10, 14 Instructor’s Translation
10 Now, a river went out from Eden to water the garden; and from there it separated and became four
heads …

14

and the name of the third river is Tigris; it goes east of Assyria.

Genesis 4:16-17 Instructor’s Translation
16

and Cain went out from the face of Yahweh, and he dwelt in the land of Wandering/Nod, east of Eden.

17

And Cain … built a city, and called the name of the city “Enoch,” according to the name of his son.
Genesis 9:18 Instructor’s Translation
And the sons of Noah who went out of the ark, were Shem and Ham and Japheth.
Genesis 10:11-12 Instructor’s Translation
From [Babylon Nimrod] went forth into Assyria and he built Nineveh … the great city.
Genesis 10:32 Instructor’s Translation
These are the families of the sons of Noah … and out of these the nations were separated on the land after
the flood.

Brothers Separate

Class Notes: Abraham

53 of 230

Avram and Lot Separating. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Reflection Question
How does the narrative tell us that Lot makes a foolish decision?

Class Notes: Abraham

54 of 230

