Session 5: God Calls Avram and Promises Blessing

Key Takeaways
Avram’s call is framed in the language of Genesis 1-2, and it prepares the reader for the themes in the
rest of his story—blessing, birth, land, family, and a great name.
Avram leaving his family echoes Genesis 2:24 and the blessing of fruitful multiplication.
God promises to make Avram’s name great, further developing the theme of names or naming
introduced in various stories in Genesis 1-11.

Macro Design of Genesis 12:1-9
Genesis 12:1-3
A - Yahweh's first word to Avram: Blessing and offspring

Genesis 12:4-6
B - Avram's response: Travel to Canaan

Genesis 12:7
A' - Yahweh's second word to Avram: Promise of land for offspring

Genesis 12:8-9
B' - Avram's response: Build an altar and travel to the Negev
Genesis 12:1-9. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Avram Leaves Babylon and Receives God’s Blessing
The narrative sequence of two divine calls and promises, each followed by Avram’s obedience, creates a clear
pattern for the reader. When God’s chosen one follows the divine command despite many unknowns, there is
a blessing just waiting to be discovered.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 12:1-3

Part 2: Avram's Journey

Class Notes: Abraham

30 of 230

Blessing and Children in the Promised Land
12:1 And Yahweh said to Avram,

a

“Get yourself going
b

from your land,

b'

and from your family,

b'

and from your father’s house ,

a'

to the land which I will show you.

a

2 And I will make you a great nation ,

b
a'

and I will make your name great;
b'

a

and I will bless you,
and so you shall be a blessing.

3 And I will bless

b

those who bless you,

b'

and the one who treats you as cursed

a'

I will curse;

a

and in you all the families of the land
b

will find blessing.”

Genesis 11:27-12:5. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Noah to
Abraham (2020).

Get Yourself Going!
The Hebrew phrase for “get yourself going” )‫ (לך לך‬in 12:1 is unique, and it’s repeated again only at the
culmination of Avram’s 10 tests in 22:2.
Genesis 12:1 Instructor’s Translation
Get yourself going from your land ... to the land that I will show you.
Genesis 22:2 Instructor’s Translation
Get yourself going to the land of Moriah, and offer [Yitskhaq] there as a going-up offering on one of the
mountains that I will tell you.

Avram’s New Family
Avram separates from his family and goes to a new place where God will create a new family. This is a
repetition of the Eden pattern where God split the lone human into two humans to create the first chosen
family. According to Genesis 2, only God can provide the necessary "help" )‫ (עזר‬that can deliver his chosen
one from helplessness.
Genesis 2:18 Instructor’s Translation

Class Notes: Abraham

31 of 230

It is not good for the human to be alone. I will make a source of delivering-help )‫ (עזר‬that corresponds to
the human.
Genesis 2:24 Instructor’s Translation
For this reason, a man will leave his father and mother, and he will be joined to his wife, and the two will
become one flesh.
Genesis 12:1 Instructor’s Translation
Get yourself going … from your land, from your birth-family and from the house of your father ...
Genesis 12:7 Instructor’s Translation
To your seed )‫ (זרע‬I will give this land.
In both narratives, God’s promise is to provide what the humans cannot provide for themselves. In Genesis 2,
it’s the “delivering help” (‘ezer, ‫ (עזר‬without which the human cannot flourish in Eden, and in Genesis 12, it’s
the “seed” (zera‘, ‫ (זרע‬without which Avram’s family cannot become a blessing to the nations.

Greatness and Blessing
Genesis 12:2 Instructor’s Translation
And I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you,
and I will make your name great; and so you shall be a blessing.
The two parallel poetic lines contain two promises of greatness and two promises of blessing.
Great nation / Great name
I will bless you / You will be a blessing
This first pair of lines highlights what God will do for Avram (make great and bless), while the second item
highlights what Avram will become in relationship to others.
Great name = a significant reputation among the nations
“Be a blessing” = Avram is summoned to become a conduit of the divine blessing he received as he
gives it out to the nations around him
These poetic lines create a vocation for Avram. He is being summoned to a new Eden-like land where God will
create him into a new chosen family where he can become a channel of divine blessing to others. This
vocation is the focus of the final lines of the poem.
Genesis 12:3 Instructor’s Translation
And I will bless
those who bless you,
and the one who treats you as cursed
I will curse;

Class Notes: Abraham

32 of 230

and in you all the families of the land
will find blessing.”
Here, God marks Avram as his chosen one and commits to protecting him from death. The promise comes in
two parts.
1. As a conduit of God’s blessing, those who associate with Avram in a friendly way will receive God’s
blessing.
2. On the flip side, those who “treat him as cursed” )‫מקללך‬, from ‫“ קלל‬to treat as insignificant”) will receive
the opposite, “curse.”

Avram as a New Adam and Noah
The divine promise of blessing corresponds to the divine blessing first given to humanity and then to Noah
after the flood.
Genesis 1:27-28 Instructor’s Translation
27

Elohim created humanity in his image, in the image of Elohim he created him; male and female he

created them.

28

And Elohim blessed them; and Elohim said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the

earth, and subdue it; and rule over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the sky and over every living
thing that moves on the earth.”
Genesis 9:1-2 Instructor’s Translation
1

And Elohim blessed Noah and his sons and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth.

2

The

fear of you and the terror of you will be on every beast of the earth and on every bird of the sky; with
everything that creeps on the ground, and all the fish of the sea, into your hand they are given.”
Genesis 12:2-3 Instructor’s Translation
2

and I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great; and so you shall

be a blessing;

3

and I will bless those who bless you, and the one who treats you as cursed I will curse; and

in you all the clan-families of the land will find blessing.
The poem of blessing in 12:2-3 has five blessings that interestingly correspond to the five curses in Genesis 111, and it has seven poetic lines that correspond to the later blessings given to the patriarchs, which also
consist of seven parts (Cassuto, Umberto (2012). From Noah to Abraham. Varda Books. 331).
Genesis 12:2-3 Instructor’s Translation
1. and I will make you a great nation
2. and I will bless you,
3. and I will make your name great;
4. and so you shall be a blessing;
5. and I will bless those who bless you,
6. and the one who treats you as cursed I will curse;
7. and in you all the clan-families of the land will find blessing.

Class Notes: Abraham

33 of 230

The five curses of Genesis 3-11
Gen. 3:14 “cursed! are you” (snake)
Gen. 3:17 “cursed! is the ground because of you” (man)
Gen. 3:14 “cursed! are you from the ground” (Cain)
Gen. 3:14 “the ground which Yahweh has cursed!"
Gen. 3:14 “cursed! is Canaan”
“The whole Bible can be portrayed as a very long answer to a very simple question: What can God do about
the sin and rebellion of the human race? Genesis 12-Revelation 22 is God’s answer to the problem posed by
the bleak narratives of Genesis 3-11. Or ... Genesis 3-11 sets the problem that the mission of God addresses
from Genesis 12 onward. Genesis 1-11 poses a cosmic problem to which God must provide a cosmic answer.
The problems so graphically spread before the reader in Genesis 1-11 will not be solved just by finding a way
to get human beings to heaven when they die. The love and power of the Creator must address not only the
sin of individuals, but also the strife and hostility of nations; not only the needs of humans, but also the
suffering on animals and the curse on the ground … The call of Abram is the beginning of God’s answer to
the evil of human hearts, the strife of nations, and the groaning brokenness of his whole creation.”
Wright, Christopher (2006). The Mission of God: Unlocking the Bible’s Grand Narrative. IVP Academic. 195.

Avram
Genesis 12:2-3 Instructor’s Translation
1. and I will make you a great nation
2. and I will bless you,
3. and I will make your name great;
4. and so you shall be a blessing;
5. and I will bless those who bless you,
6. and the one who treats you as cursed I will curse;
7. and in you all the clan-families of the land will find blessing.

Isaac
Genesis 26:3-4 Instructor’s Translation
1. and I will be with you,
2. and I will bless you,
3. for to you and to your descendants I will give all these lands,
4. and I will fulfil the oath which I swore to Avraham your father.
5. I will multiply your descendants as the stars of heaven,
6. and will give to your descendants all these lands;
7. and by your descendants all the nations of the earth shall bless themselves.

Jacob
Genesis 27:28-29 Instructor’s Translation

Class Notes: Abraham

34 of 230

1. May God give you of the dew of heaven, etc.
2. Let peoples serve you,
3. and nations bow down to you.
4. Be lord over your brothers,
5. and may your mother’s sons bow down to you.
6. Cursed be every one who curses you,
7. and blessed be every one who blesses you!

Relationship to Juxtaposed Sections
Avram’s journey to Canaan is actually a completion of what his father Terakh left undone back in 11:31. Avram’s
actions are clearly set in contrast to his father.
Genesis 11:31 NASB
Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his grandson, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son
Abram’s wife; and they went out together from Ur of the Chaldeans in order to enter the land of Canaan;
and they went as far as Haran, and settled there.
Genesis 12:5 NASB
Abram took Sarai his wife and Lot his nephew, and all their possessions which they had accumulated, and
the persons which they had acquired in Haran, and they set out for the land of Canaan; thus they came to
the land of Canaan.

Translation and Literary Design of Genesis 12:6-9
Avram’s Sojourn to Shechem
a 6 And Avram passed through (‫)ויעבר‬

in the land

b unto the place of Shechem
b' unto the oak of Moreh,
a' and the Canaanite was then in the land .

Worship + Altar for Yahweh
a 7 And Yahweh appeared to Avram and he said,
b “To your seed I will give this land.”
a' And he built there an altar to Yahweh

who appeared to him .

Avram's Sojourn to Bethel
a 8 And he moved on (‫ )ויעתק‬from there
b to the hill from the east of Bethel,

Class Notes: Abraham

35 of 230

a' and he spread out his tent,
b' Bethel on the west
b' and Ai from the east;

Worship + Altar for Yahweh
a and he built there an altar to Yahweh
a' and he called upon the name of Yahweh.

Avram’s Sojourn to the Negev
a 9 And Avram journeyed (‫ )ויסע‬,
a' continually journeying (‫ )נסוע‬to the Negev.

Genesis 12:6-9. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Noah to Abraham
(2020).

Map of Avram’s First Migration in the Land of Canaan

Openstreetmap.org.

Avram enters Canaan from the north, and he passes along the hill country that runs from north to south with
the coastal and Jordan River valleys on each side. As he does so, he makes a number of very interesting stops
along the way.

Avram the Shepherd and the Canaanite Cities
Avram is portrayed as making three stops, the first two near hilltop towns central to the highway network in
Canaan. The narrative highlights how he does not enter the cities populated with Canaanites. Instead, Avram
sets up camp near the cities, and he builds new places of worship for the Elohim who called him to this land.

Class Notes: Abraham

36 of 230

The narrative highlights how "the Canaanite was in the land at that time" to show us that Avram isn’t
integrating into Canaanite culture. Instead, he sets up his own alternative residence with unique places of
worship dedicated to his Elohim.

Avram’s Alternate Society
In this way, Avram is depicted along parallel lines to Abel and Seth, in contrast to Cain and Lemek.

Adam’s Sons in Genesis 4

Noah’s “Sons” in Genesis 12

Gen. 4:2-4 Abel was a “shepherd of the flock” and

Gen. 12:5, 16 Avram (from the line of Shem) leads

made offerings to Yahweh from his flock

a migrating shepherd caravan with many flocks

Gen. 4:26 Seth, the seed given in the place of

Gen. 12:6, 8 Avram builds altars in Canaan and

Abel, has his first son, named Enosh (= “human”),

“calls upon the name of Yahweh”

when “it was begun, calling on the name of
Yahweh.”

Cain was a farmer (Gen. 4:1-4), who, after his

Gen. 12:6 The Canaanites (from the line of Ham),

murder of Abel the shepherd, went on to build the

in contrast to Avram, live in the cities

first city in the Bible and named it after his first
son, Khanok (= “dedicated,” Gen. 4:17)

Adam’s Sons and Noah’s Sons. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Avram becomes the new humanity from the line of Yahweh worshippers who are chosen and set apart from
their urban siblings who worship manmade things (gods or cities). Avram will establish the worship of the
creator God, and he begins by marking the central hill country as the territory of Yahweh.

Avram’s Journey as a Foundation Pattern
Avram’s three-stop journey through the promised land begins a pattern that is later mirrored by his grandson
Yaaqov (Jacob) in Gen. 33-35, and yet again by Joshua and the Israelites (Josh. 7-8).

Avram

Jacob

Joshua (After Stop #1: Jericho)

Stop #1: Shechem

Stop #1: Shechem

Stop #3: Shechem

Gen. 12:6-7 And Avram passed

Gen. 33:18, 20 And Jacob

Josh. 8:30 Then Joshua built an

through in the land until the

came safely to the city of

altar to the Lord, the God of

place of Shechem , unto the

Shechem , which is in the land

Israel, on Mount Ebal [just

Avram’s Journey Pattern. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Class Notes: Abraham

37 of 230

Avram

Jacob

Joshua (After Stop #1: Jericho)

Terebinth of Vision … And he

of Canaan, when he returned

outside Shechem, see Deut.

built an altar there to Yahweh

from Paddan-Aram, and he

11:29-30]

who appeared to him.

camped in front of the city …
And he set up a pillar there, and
called it “El, the God of Israel.”

Stop #2: Bethel

Stop #2: Bethel

Stop #2: Bethel

Gen. 12:8 And he set out from

Gen. 35:1 And God said to

Josh. 7:2 Now Joshua sent men

there to the to the mountain

Jacob, “Get up, go up to Bethel

from Jericho to Ai, which is near

east of Bethel (‫)מקדם לבית אל‬,

and stay there and make there

Beth-aven, east of Bethel (

and he pitched his tent, with

an altar to El who appeared to

‫)מקדם לבית אל‬, and said to them,

Bethel on the west and Ai on the

you when you fled from your

“Go up and spy out the land.” So

brother Esau.

the men went up and spied out

east (‫)מקדם‬. And he built there

Ai.

an altar to Yahweh and he
called on the name of Yahweh.

Gen. 35:6-7 So Jacob came to
Luz (that is, Bethel), which is in

Josh. 8:9 Joshua sent them

the land of Canaan … And he

away, and they went to the

built an altar there, and called
the place El-bethel

place of ambush and remained
between Bethel and Ai (

‫)בין בית אל ובין העי‬, on the west
side of Ai (‫ ;)מים לעי‬but Joshua
spent that night among the
people.

Stop #3: The Negev

Stop #3: The Negev

Stop #4: The Negev

Gen. 12:9 And Avram set out (

Gen. 35:27 Jacob came home to

Josh. 10:40 Thus Joshua struck

‫ )ויסע‬continuing and traveling to

his father Isaac in Mamre, near

all the land, the hill country and

the Negev.

Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron),

the Negev and the lowland and

where Avraham and Isaac had

the slopes and all their kings.

stayed.
Josh. 11:16 Thus Joshua took all
Gen. 46:1 So Israel set out (‫)ויסע‬

that land: the hill country and all

with all that he had, and came to

the Negev, all that land of

Beersheba, and offered

Goshen, the lowland, the

sacrifices to the God of his

Arabah, the hill country of Israel

father Isaac.

and its lowland

Avram’s Journey Pattern. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

“Now we can understand why the Torah stressed, in all their detail, Abram’s journeys on entering the land of
Canaan, at first as far as Shekem, and subsequently up to Ai-Bethel. Scripture intended to present us here,
through the symbolic conquest of Abram, with a kind of forecast of what would happen to his descendants
later. According to this tradition the token was first given to Abram and afterwards repeated to Jacob, and
the significance of the duplication is to corroborate and ratify, as the Bible itself makes clear when citing

Class Notes: Abraham

38 of 230

the words of Joseph to Pharaoh (41:32): And the doubling of Pharaoh’s dream means that the thing is fixed
by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass. In conformity with this, the book of Joshua portrays for us the
actual subjugation in a manner paralleling the ideal conquest by the Patriarchs—even the wording is similar
—as though to say, the possession of the land gained in the days of Joshua was already implied, in essence,
in the symbolic conquest that the first patriarchs had effected in their time, and that it was all predestined
and foretold from the beginning in accordance with the Lord’s will.”
Cassuto, Umberto (2012). From Noah to Abraham. Varda Books. 305-306.

The Promise of Land
Notice that at the center of 12:6-9 is the promise of land for Avram’s family.

Worship + Altar for Yahweh
a 7 And Yahweh appeared to Avram and he said,
b “To your seed I will give this land.”
a' And he built there an altar to Yahweh

who appeared to him .

Genesis 12:6-9. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Noah to Abraham
(2020).
God’s promise in 12:1-3 focused on the family that God would build from Avram and Sarai’s lineage, and Avram
was simply told to “go to the land that I will show you.” Now that Avram has arrived in that land, the next part
of God’s promise is revealed: The land itself will become part of Avram’s inheritance. This two-stage
presentation of God’s promise creates an important analogy between the two elements of God’s promise.

Genesis 12:1-3
Divine Promise #1

• "Go to the land I will show you ... I will bless you and make you a great nation. "
Genesis 12:4-6
Avram Travels to the Land, Sets Up Altars to Yahweh

Genesis 12:7
Divine Promise #2

• "To your seed I will give this land ."
Genesis 12:8
Avram Travels to the Land, Sets Up Altars to Yahweh

Class Notes: Abraham

39 of 230

Genesis 12:1-8. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

This analogy between the promise of seed and land is foundational for the rest of the Avraham story. These
two elements of God’s promise become closely intertwined, each involving the other, so they become
inseparable from each other. The promise of a family lineage requires a place for that family to live, and the
promise of a land to inhabit assumes the existence of a family who will cultivate the land. In this way, the
promise resembles the divine blessing given to Adam and Eve, which is certainly why the narrator highlights
the fact that Avram makes his altars on high places near trees.

Avram’s Sojourn to Shechem
a 6 And Avram passed through (‫)ויעבר‬

in the land

b unto the place of Shechem
b' unto the oak of Moreh,
a' and the Canaanite was then in the land .

Worship + Altar for Yahweh
a 7 And Yahweh appeared to Avram and he said,
b “To your seed I will give this land.”
a' And he built there an altar to Yahweh

who appeared to him .

Genesis 12:6-9. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Noah to Abraham
(2020).
All of these words are built from the Hebrew root ra’ah )‫“ (ראה‬to see.” It’s a not-so-subtle allusion to the trees
of Eden, where the humans “saw” and had “their eyes opened” after a great failure to trust Yahweh’s wisdom.
Here Avram has his eyes opened to see Yahweh after his first act of trust in Yahweh’s summons to leave his
family and come to Canaan.

Blessing Out of the Scattering

Class Notes: Abraham

40 of 230

Out of the Scattering. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Reflection Question
Contrast God promising to make Avram’s name great with the architects of the tower of Babylon desiring to
make a great name for themselves. What does this show us about God’s character and what God desires to
see in humans?

Class Notes: Abraham

41 of 230

