Session 7: Ezekiel the Watchman

Key Takeaways
God appoints Ezekiel as a watchman but prevents him from being a mediator as he faces the
impending destruction of Jerusalem.
God’s justice demands judgment for Israel’s violence and unfaithfulness, but in his covenant he
promises that blessing will come through Israel. God must lead his chosen people through death to
bring them to resurrection hope on the other side.

Translation and Literary Design of Ezekiel 3:16-27

16 And it came about at the end of the seven days,

that the spoken-word of Yahweh came to me saying ,
17 “Son of Man, I have made you a

watchman

for the house of Israel ,

and when you hear a word from my mouth,
then you shall give them a warning from me."

a 18 When I say to the wicked man , ‘You are going to die !’
b and you do not warn him

and you do not speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way in order to preserve his life ,
c then the wicked man will die in his guilt,

but his blood I shall require from you.

b' 19 But as for you, when you warn

the wicked man ,

and he does not turn from his wickedness or from his wicked way,
c' he will die in his guilt

and you will deliver your own life .

a 20 And when the righteous man turns from his righteousness and does evil,
b then I will place a stumbling block before him;

he will die , because you did not warn him,
c in his sin he will die ,

and his righteous deeds which he did, they will not be remembered,
and I shall require his blood from you.

b' 21 But as for you, when you warn him, the righteous man ,

Class Notes: Ezekiel

49 of 249

that the righteous man should not sin,
and he does not sin,
c' he shall surely live , for he was warned ;

and you will deliver your own life .

22 And the hand of Yahweh was upon me there

and he said to me,
“Get up, go out to the plain,
and there I will speak with you.”
23 And I got up and I went out to the plain,

and behold there was the glory of Yahweh ,
it was standing like the glory that I saw by the river Chebar,
and I fell on my face.
24a And the spirit entered me

and she stood me on my feet

24b and he spoke to me

and he said to me,
“Go, close yourself up inside your house.
25 And as for you, son of man,

look, they will put cords on you ,
and they will bind you with them,
and you will not go out in their midst.

26 And I will make your tongue cleave to your mouth

and you will be silent and you will not be a

mediator

for them ,

for they are a rebellious house.

27 And when I do speak to you,

I will open your mouth
and you will say to them,
‘Thus says [the Lord] Yahweh.’
The one who hears, let him hear;
and the one who desists, let him desist,
for they are a rebellious house.

Ezekiel 3:16-27. Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021)

Ezekiel’s Prophetic Sign Acts
Like ancient street theater, the sign acts are a multimedia expression of the prophetic message (see
1 Kgs. 11:29-31; 2 Kgs. 13:14-19; Hos. 1-3; Isa. 20; Jer. 32; art of Banksy). The symbolic actions not only visually

Class Notes: Ezekiel

50 of 249

reinforce the message, but also prefigure or guarantee the event being alluded to.

3:17-21: Ezekiel as Israel’s Watchman (Connection to Ezek. 18, 33:7-9)
Ezekiel is like an army sentinel posted on the city walls looking for the approach of the enemy. The metaphor
is profound and ironic.
Israel is in danger from an enemy—Yahweh himself (“a warning from/about me” 3:17, Babylon is just an agent,
see also Jer. 27). Israel has been given a watchman, commissioned and posted by Yahweh himself (what
enemy posts a sentinel in his target city?). Yahweh is both enemy and guardian of Israel. He wants to save
Israel, but will not let their apostasy go unchecked.

3:16, 22-27: Ezekiel Bound in His House and Mute
The first paragraph (Ezek. 3:16-27) portrays Ezekiel’s prophetic role among the people, and it’s a bit of
paradox. He is, first of all, a “watchman” )‫(צפה‬, a sentinel guard on the city wall who is to warn the people of
any approaching danger. This metaphor leads to the vocabulary of “warning” )‫ (הזהיר‬in the following
paragraph (Ezek. 3:18-24). This is a fairly straightforward description of the prophetic task, and the same
image is used of other prophets as well (Isa. 21:6, 52:8; Mic. 7:7; Hab. 2:2).
In the literary design of the paragraph, Ezekiel’s role as a watchman is set on analogy to the final unit in
Ezekiel 3:24b-27, where Ezekiel is bound up and unable to speak among the people.

16 And it came about at the end of the seven days,

that the spoken-word of Yahweh came to me saying ,
17 “Son of Man, I have made you a

watchman

for the house of Israel ,

and when you hear a word from my mouth,
then you shall give them a warning from me."

3:24b And he spoke to me

and he said to me,
“Go, close yourself up inside your house.
25 And as for you, son of man,

look, they will put cords on you ,
and they will bind you with them,
and you will not go out in their midst.

26 And I will make your tongue cleave to your mouth

and you will be silent and you will not be a

mediator

for them ,

for they are a rebellious house.

27 And when I do speak to you,

I will open your mouth
and you will say to them,

Class Notes: Ezekiel

51 of 249

‘Thus says [the Lord] Yahweh.’
The one who hears, let him hear;
and the one who desists, let him desist,
for the are a rebellious house."

Ezekiel 3:16-27. Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021)
Ezekiel is bound with cords (3:25). This could refer (1) to the exiles’ resistance to his message (cf. the
persecution of Jeremiah, Jer. 20:1-2, 37-38). But this seems odd, because the elders of the Israelite exiles are
regularly depicted as coming to visit Ezekiel (see 14:1, 20:1). This could (2) be connected to Yahweh’s
statement that he will “bind” (Ezek. 4:8) Ezekiel in the sign act about the siege of Jerusalem, where he will be
tied up in house to carry the sins of Israel. This scene begins to look curiously like a combination of images
from the Aqedah of Isaac (Gen. 22) and the Day of Atonement (Lev. 16).
This divinely imposed house arrest is explained in the following lines, as Ezekiel is to become “mute” (
Ezek. 3:26, ‫(נאלם‬. This mute state will last for the next seven years (until Ezek. 33:21-24). Ezekiel will be unable
to speak except for the prophetic oracles Yahweh gives him to speak.
Yahweh’s goal in making his prophet mute is to prevent him from playing the role of a “mediator” or
“advocate” (3:26, ‫(איש מוכיח‬. The “mediator” is a person who stands in between two parties in conflict and
advocates for the interests of one or both.

Jacob and Laban
Genesis 31:36-37 NASB*
36

Then Jacob became angry and contended with Laban; and Jacob said to Laban, “What is my

transgression? What is my sin that you have hotly pursued me?

37

Though you have felt through all my

goods, what have you found of all your household goods? Set it here before my brothers and your brothers,
that they may mediate between us two.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

David and the Men of Benjamin
1 Chronicles 12:16-17 NASB*
16

Then some of the sons of Benjamin and Judah came to the stronghold to David.

17

David went out to

meet them, and said to them, “If you come peacefully to me to help me, my heart shall be united with you;
but if to betray me to my adversaries, since there is no wrong in my hands, may the God of our fathers look
on it and advocate for me.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Job and Elohim
Job 9:32-33 NASB*
32

For [Elohim] is not a man as I am that I may answer him, that we may go to court together.

33

There is no

mediator between us, who may lay his hand upon us both.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

52 of 249

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

In situations of conflict, the mediator acts as a neutral party who represents the interests of both groups and
tries to negotiate a settlement. This is precisely the “Moses-model” of the prophet who inserts themself
between Yahweh and the people and advocates that Yahweh forgive the sins of the people.
Noah on Mount Ararat making his sacrifice after the flood: Genesis 8:20-23
Moses on Mount Sinai in the golden calf narrative: Exodus 32-33
Aaron in the wilderness in the story of Korah’s rebellion: Numbers 16-18
Samuel in the story of Israel’s idolatry with the ark: 1 Samuel 6-7
Isaiah in the Assyrian crisis of Hezekiah’s day: 2 Kings 18-20
Huldah in the story of Josiah’s covenant renewal: 2 Kings 22-23
Amos’ three acts of intercession: Amos 7-8
Amos 7:1-3 NASB
1

Thus Yahweh Elohim showed me, and look, he was forming a locust-swarm when the spring crop began to

sprout. And look, the spring crop was after the king’s mowing.

2

And when it had finished eating the

vegetation of the land, I said,
“Lord Yahweh, please forgive!
How can Jacob endure,
for he is small?”
3

Yahweh changed his mind about this.

“It shall not be,” said Yahweh.
These stories present a moment of crisis and conflict between God and his people, and the mediator steps in
and offers a sacrifice of surrender, advocating for the guilty party. And in all of these stories, Yahweh forgives.

Yahweh Prevents the Mediator
Yahweh prevents two prophets from playing the role of mediator, and they both happen to live in the same
period during the years leading up to the destruction of Jersualem. While in exile, Ezekiel is told not to
intercede for guilty Israel, and at the same time in Jerusalem, Jeremiah is given the same order from Yahweh.
Jeremiah 7:16 NASB*
16

As for you, do not pray for this people,

and do not lift up cry )‫ (רנה‬or prayer )‫ (תפלה‬for them,
and do not intercede )‫ (פגע‬with me;
for I do not hear you.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Jeremiah 11:14 NASB
Therefore do not pray for this people,
nor lift up a cry or prayer for them;
for I will not listen when they call to me because of their disaster.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

53 of 249

Jeremiah 14:11-12 NASB
11

So the LORD said to me,

“Do not pray for the welfare of this people.
12

When they fast, I am not going to listen to their cry;

and when they offer burnt offering and grain offering, I am not going to accept them.
Rather I am going to make an end of them by the sword, famine and pestilence.”
Uniquely, Jeremiah and Ezekiel are told not to intercede for Judah and Jerusalem because the ruin of Israel
and the destruction of the city and temple are inevitable. But because Yahweh has a pattern of listening to the
petition of his prophets, he orders them to simply stop interceding.
This portrait significantly nuances Ezekiel’s role. He is to warn Israel of the coming disaster, but he is not to
intercede on behalf of Israel or portray any sense of hope on this side of the Babylonian onslaught. He is
simply to announce its inevitable arrival, and only then will his mouth “open” to say something new. In the
final line of Ezekiel 3:27 is a small seed of hope that will blossom into the restoration poems of Ezekiel 34-48.
But for now, it’s only bad news.
This entire scene sets the stage for Ezekiel’s sign acts in Ezekiel 4:1-5:17: a mute, bound man shut up in his
house, burning with emotion, acting out these strange symbolic stories to his fellow refugees.

Reflection Question
How do you understand Ezekiel’s role? What has God sent him to do or not do?

Class Notes: Ezekiel

54 of 249

