Session 23: Gog and the Snake

Key Takeaways
Gog represents opposition to God’s purposes from all the other nations that have not entered Israel’s
story.
For God to bring blessing to the whole world, he must confront the influence of the snake in all the
nations.
Ancestry doesn't determine who we are before God. How we respond to God determines our
relationship with God.

Yahweh’s Victory Over Evil Among the Nations
In Ezekiel 38-39 two great themes from earlier in the book are taken up.
1. The restoration of Israel as Yahweh’s covenant people so that his glorious presence that left the temple
can be restored.
2. The restoration of Yahweh’s tarnished reputation among the nations due to Israel’s disobedience and
exile.
Ezekiel 38-48 addresses these themes in reverse order.

The Gog Oracles
These chapters are a hiatus between the promise of a future temple in Ezekiel 37:26-28 and its realization in
chapters 40-48. The subject is how Yahweh will deal with the still existing threat of evil and rebellion among
the nations as part of his plan to restore his world. After Yahweh has dealt with evil among his own covenant
people, he turns his attention to the nations to do the same.
The key text that these chapters look back to is the central oracle of the oracles against the nations,
Ezekiel 28:25-26, which was not about the nations, but about Yahweh’s vindication of Israel in the eyes of the
nations who had scorned them. Specifically, it said that Israel would be restored back to its land, living
securely “when I execute judgment upon all those round about them who scorn them” (28:26). It seems that
chapters 38-39 take up this earlier unique idea of a further divine defeat of rebellious nations after Israel’s
restoration, and develop and expand upon it further.
The oracles are structured as two large panels, each consisting of four distinct sections with parallel
introductions (in Ezek. 38:1-4 and 39:1-2) and conclusions (Ezek. 38:23 and 39:21-29). The flow of the oracles
does not follow a linear logic, and the chapters are full of allusive language and imagery from earlier
prophetic oracles along with grotesque, extreme images.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

173 of 249

The Symmetrical Design of Ezekiel 38–39
The Defeat of Gog: Take 1

The Defeat and Disposal of Gog: Take 2

38:1-9:

39:1-8:

Gog and his army are summoned by Yahweh to

Gog and his army are summoned and defeated by

the mountains of Israel

Yahweh on the mountains of Israel

“Son of man, set your face against Gog … and

“And you Son of man, prophesy against Gog and

prophesy against him and say, ‘Thus says

say, ‘Thus says Yahweh, Look I am against you

Yahweh, Look I am against you Gog, head ruler of

Gog, head ruler of Meshek and Tuval, and I will

Meshek and Tuval, and I will lead you out …”

lead you out …”

38:10-13:

39:9-16:

Gog’s motives: to get plunder

Gog’s remains are burned, plundered, and then
buried

“Have you come to plunder plunder? Have you
gathered your gathering to despoil the spoil?”

“And [the residents of Israel] will plunder their

(38:12)

plunderers, and they will get spoil from those
who got spoil from them.” (39:10)

38:14-16:

39:17-24:

Gog and his army are summoned by Yahweh so

Gog’s remains are consumed in a sacrificial feast

that the nations acknowledge Yahweh

38:17-23:

39:25-29:

The four-fold defeat of Gog Earthquake, sword,

Yahweh is acknowledged among Israel and the

plague, and flood & fire

nations when he defeats Gog and restores Israel

“And I will show myself as great, and I will show

“And I will show myself as holy through them in

myself as holy, and I will be acknowledged in the

the eyes of many nations, and they will

eyes of the nations and you will acknowledge

acknowledge that I am Yahweh their God.”

that I am Yahweh.” (38:23)

(39:27-28)

The Defeat of Gog. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

The Scriptural Roots of the Gog Oracles
These two chapters are the end result of a long-developing theme that began in Genesis 3, with the deceptive
snake and the promise of perpetual hostility between the seed of the snake and the seed of the woman.
Genesis 3:14-15 NASB*

Class Notes: Ezekiel

174 of 249

14

And Yahweh Elohim said to the snake,

“Because you have done this,
you are cursed more than all cattle,
and more than every beast of the field;
on your belly you will go,
and dust you will eat
all the days of your life;
15

And I will put hostility between you and the woman,

and between your seed and her seed;
he shall strike your head,
and you shall strike his heel.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

This promise of perpetual hostility between the lineage of God’s promise and the lineage of the deceptive
spiritual powers at work in creation is developed in the following narrative of Adam and Eve’s three sons: the
brothers Cain, Abel, and Seth.
Cain is consumed by an animal called “sin” that compels him to murder the seed of the woman. Cain's lineage
leads to the founding of the city of blood in Genesis 4:17-24 and the lineage of Tubal-Qayin. Adam and Eve’s
lineage restarts with Seth which leads to the worship of Yahweh (Gen. 4:26).
This “sibling hostility” between the seed of the woman and the seed of the snake continues in the story of
Noah, a new Adam figure, who also has three sons who end up at odds with each other after the blessings
and curses issued by their father.
Genesis 9:25-27 Instructor's Translation
25

And he said:

“Cursed be Canaan,
a servant of servants
he will be to his brothers.”
26

And he said:

“Blessed be Yahweh,
God of Shem,
and may Canaan be a servant to him/them.
27

May God enlarge Japheth,

and may he dwell in the tents of Shem
and may Canaan be a servant to him/them.”

A Future for Japheth ... and Shem ... and Canaan
Noah’s word that God would "enlarge" )‫ (יפת‬Japheth plays on his name in Hebrew, Yephet )‫(יפת‬. The name
comes from the root patah = “to make large.” Noah anticipates that Japheth’s territory will be expanded in the
future.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

175 of 249

The enlarging of Japheth invites the reader to study the list of Japheth’s descendants in Genesis 10:2-5.
Genesis 10:2-5 NASB*
2

The sons of Japheth:

Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.
3

The sons of Gomer were Ashkenaz and Riphath and Togarmah.

4

The sons of Javan were Elishah and Tarshish, Kittim and Dodanim.

5

From these the islands of the nations were separated into their lands ...

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Here we find tribes and nations that mostly make up ancient Anatolia (Roman Asia Minor, modern Turkey) and
Greece. Noah anticipates that these tribes and nations will enlarge their territory and make their way into the
territory of Shem.
“May he dwell in the tents of Shem” could be interpreted in two different ways.

“To displace, to disinherit”
There are some contexts where one group “dwelling in the tent” of another is the result of conflict and
dispossession.
Psalm 78:55 NASB
[Yahweh] also drove out the nations before them, and apportioned them for an inheritance by
measurement, and made the tribes of Israel dwell in their tents.
1 Chronicles 5:10 NASB*
In the days of Saul they made war with the Hagrites, who fell by their hand, so that they dwelt in their tents
throughout all the land east of Gilead.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

On this reading, Noah’s words anticipate a future conflict between all of his children where Japheth
dispossesses Shem from his tent and makes Canaan his slave. Many texts throughout the Hebrew Bible
activate this meaning. For example, this meaning is possible when the nations at war with Israel are from
Japheth, or when a future conflict is anticipated between Israel and the nations.
In Genesis 14, five kings of the east (two from Ham and two from Japheth) come to enslave four rebellious
kings of Canaan. In the conflict, Lot, a descendant of Shem, is taken captive. Abram, a son of Shem, and two
Canaanite allies defeat the five kings and restore the captives. The Canaanite priest king Melchizedek also
appears in this narrative, and he worships the creator God and blesses Abram.
The pagan prophet Balaam speaks about the future conflict between Noah’s sons (Num. 24:23-24). He speaks
of a descendant of Japheth, the Kittim, who will come to oppress Asshur (from Ham and Shem) and Eber
(from Shem).
This conflict is expanded and developed in Daniel 7-12 in the sequence of empires leading up to the final
beast and horn that will displace the sons of Ham (Assyria and Babylon) and Shem (the Israelites) in terms of

Class Notes: Ezekiel

176 of 249

political power in the land promised to Abraham.
Noah’s blessing on Japheth and its relation to the table of nations in Genesis 10 is also behind Ezekiel’s
fascinating oracle about Gog of Magog. Magog is a seed of Japheth and rules over his brothers Meshek and
Tubal. He also brings the sons of Ham (Cush and Put) and non-Israelite sons of Shem (Persia/Elam) as
mercenaries in his war with Israel after its restoration from exile. Ezekiel brings together the common Day of
Yahweh motif where Yahweh destroys the seed of the serpent from among the nations (see Isa. 13-14; Joel 3-4;
Zech. 14).

“To live together with”
Living in the same tent is an image of unity in some texts.
Psalm 15:1 NIV*
Yahweh, who may dwell in your sacred tent? Who may live on your holy mountain?
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The ideal state of God’s covenant people is to “dwell in his tent,” that is, to live with him in peace and
harmony.

Job 11:14-15 NIV
14

If you put away the sin that is in your hand and allow no evil to dwell in your tent,

15

then, free of fault, you will lift up your face; you will stand firm and without fear.

Job’s friends accuse him of living in unity with evil, which must be why he’s suffering.

Psalm 120:5 NIV
Woe to me that I dwell in Meshek, that I live among the tents of Kedar!
The poet laments that he has to live in the tents of Meshek (a descendant of Japheth) and Kedar (a son of
Ishmael).

On this reading, Noah’s words anticipate a day when all of his sons will live together in peace so that the
“nations” (sons of Japheth) would be incorporated into the “tents of Shem,” that is, experience Yahweh’s
covenant blessings.
Genesis 12:1-3, 17:3-8, and 22:15-18 all point to this incorporation of the nations into the blessing of
Abraham’s family.
Isaiah 2:1-4 and chapter 60 depict this gathering of the nations to live in the new Jerusalem and
experience its abundance.
Zechariah 2:10-13 and 8:23 depict this same inclusion of the nations in the post-exile restoration of
God’s covenant people.
Zechariah 2:10-11 NASB

Class Notes: Ezekiel

177 of 249

10

“Sing for joy and be glad, O daughter of Zion; for behold I am coming and I will dwell in your midst,”

declares the LORD.

11

“Many nations will join themselves to the LORD in that day and will become my

people. Then I will dwell in your midst, and you will know that the LORD of hosts has sent me to you.”
Interestingly, Zechariah 14 brings together both potential meanings of Genesis 9:27. First there is a great
conflict between the sons of Noah, resulting in a remnant among the nations that comes to the new
Jerusalem to experience its Eden blessings.
Zechariah 14:1-3, 9-11, 16 NASB*
1

Behold, a day is coming for Yahweh when the spoil taken from you will be divided among you.

gather all the nations against Jerusalem to battle ...

3

2

For I will

Then Yahweh will go forth and fight against those

nations, as when he fights on a day of battle. ...
9

And the LORD will be King over all the earth; in that day Yahweh will be the only one, and his name the

only one.

10

All the land will be changed into a plain from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem; but

Jerusalem will rise and remain on its site from Benjamin’s Gate as far as the place of the First Gate to the
Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the king’s wine presses.

11

People will live in it, and there will

no longer be a curse, for Jerusalem will dwell in security. ...
16

Then it will come about that any who are remaining of all the nations that went against Jerusalem will go

up from year to year to worship the King, Yahweh of hosts, and to celebrate the Feast of Booths.
Key Words Adapted by Teacher

“If the dwelling of Japheth in the tents of Shem presupposes the conquest of the land of Shem by Japheth,
it is a blessing not only to Japheth, but to Shem also, since, whilst Japheth enters into the spiritual
inheritance of Shem, he brings to Shem all the good of this world (see Isa. 60). ‘The fulfilment,’ as Delitzsch
says, ‘is plain enough, for we are all Japhethites dwelling in the tents of Shem; and the language of the New
Testament is the language of Javan entered into the tents of Shem.’ ... Moreover it is true of the blessing
and curse of Noah, as of all prophetic utterances, that they are fulfilled with regard to the nations and
families in question as a whole, but do not predict, like an irresistible fate, the unalterable destiny of every
individual; on the contrary, they leave room for freedom of personal decision, and no more cut off the
individuals in the accursed race from the possibility of conversion, or close the way of salvation against the
penitent, than they secure the individuals of the family blessed against the possibility of falling from a state
of grace, and actually losing the blessing. Hence, whilst a Rahab and an Araunah were received into the
fellowship of Jehovah, and the Canaanitish woman was relieved by the Lord because of her faith, the
hardened Pharisees and scribes had woes pronounced upon them, and Israel was rejected because of its
unbelief.”
Keil, C.F. and Delitzsch, F. (1996). Commentary on the Old Testament, Volume 1. Hendrickson Publishers. 101.
Noah’s words invite us to ponder this portrait of the future of nations, using the patterns of Genesis 1-11 to
anticipate just where the story is going. The table of nations, then, becomes a palette of future hope. The
stories to follow, from Genesis 11 to the end of 2 Kings, all work out the programmatic poems in Genesis 3:1415 and 9:25-27. There will be hostility between the seed of the woman and the seed of the snake.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

178 of 249

When the nations are at war, they are giving in to the power of the snake that is luring them into jealous
and angry violence (see “Gog of Magog” in Ezek. 38-39).
When the nations become a “tent of Yahweh,” then humanity will see that they are brothers who can live
together in peace )Ps. 133; Isa. 2:1-4).

Woman Versus Snake

Woman Vs. Snake. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

Reflection Question
How do God’s curse on the snake (Gen. 3:15) and Noah’s curse and blessings on his sons (Gen. 9:25-27) form
the scriptural background for the Gog oracles (Ezek. 38-39)?

Class Notes: Ezekiel

179 of 249

