Session 28: The River From the Temple

Key Takeaways
The image of a river flowing out from the mountain of God takes us right back to Eden.
The river that flows out from the temple refreshes the most barren parts of the land, but it doesn’t stop
there. The ever-flowing river can be imagined as bringing God’s life to the whole world.
The name of the city is “Yahweh is over there,” that is, Yahweh is in his temple, set apart from the city.

Macro Design of Ezekiel 47:1-48:35
Ezekiel 47:1-48:35
The Restored Land Inheritance as a New Eden
47:1-1
A - The River of Life from the Temple

• 47:1-5 Ezekiel’s tour of the river coming out of the temple
• 47:6-7 The trees on the side of the river
• 47:8-12 The river goes to the Dead Sea and brings new life
47:13-23
B - The Borders of the Restored Land Inheritance
A - 47:13-14 The land inheritance to be distributed to the 12 tribes of Israel
B - 47:15-20 Description of the land’s 4 outer borders
A' - 47:21-23 The land inheritance to be distributed for the 12 tribes, including immigrants

48:1-29
B' - The Restored Land Inheritance for the Twelve Tribes
A - 48:1-7 The land inheritance of the 7 tribes north of the sacred reserve
B - 48:8-22 The central sacred reserve for the Levites, priests, temple, city, and chief
A' - 48:23-29 The land inheritance of the 5 tribes south of the sacred reserve

48:30-35
A’ - The Twelve Gates of the City and its M=ame

Class Notes: Ezekiel

236 of 249

• 48:30-35 The reserve-city’s 12 gates for the 12 tribes, and the name of the city
Ezekiel 47:1-48:35. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

Translation and Literary Design of Ezekiel 47:1-12

1 And he brought me back to the door of the house;

and look, waters were coming out from under the threshold of the house toward the east ,
for the house was facing east ,
and the waters were going down down from underneath,
from the south side of the house,
from south of the altar.

2 And he brought me out by way of the north gate,

and he led me around a way on the outside,
to the outside gate,
by way of the gate that faces east ,
and look, waters were trickling from the south side.
A
3 When the man went out toward the east ,

with a line in his hand,
then he measured a thousand cubits,
and he led me through the waters , waters reaching the ankles.
4 And he measured a thousand,

and led me through the waters , waters reaching the knees;
and he measured a thousand,
and led me through the waters , waters reaching the thighs,
5 and he measured a thousand,

and it was a river that I was not able to cross,
for the waters had risen,
waters for swimming in,
a river that could not be crossed.

6 And he said to me,

“Son of a human,
B

do you seen this?”
And he brought and returned me back to the edge of the river .
7 When he returned me, look, at the edge of the river ,

trees, very many, on the one side and on the other .

Class Notes: Ezekiel

237 of 249

8 And he said to me,

“These waters are going out toward region of the east ,
and going down into the southern-desert,
then they go toward the sea,
being made to flow into the sea,
and the waters of the sea are healed .

9 And it will come about, every living creature that swarms,

in every place where the river goes,
they will have life .
And there will be fish, very many,
A'

for where these waters go, then they are healed ,
and everywhere the river goes,
they will have life .

10 And it will come about that fishermen will stand beside it;

from the Spring of Gedi to the Spring of Eglayim,
there will be a place for the spreading of nets.
Their fish will be according to their kinds,
like the fish of the Great Sea, very many.
11 But its swamps and marshes,

they will not be healed ,
they will be left for salt.

12 By the river on its edge,

on one side and on the other ,
there will come up every kind of tree for food ;
their leaves will not wither,
B'

and their fruit will not finish,
and each month they will bring first-fruit,
because their waters flow from the sanctuary,
and their fruit will be for food ,
and their leaves for healing .”

Ezekiel 47:1-12. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

The Temple’s River of Life
The river turns from a trickle in the temple (Ezek. 47:2) into a river a mile wide (Ezek. 47:6), turning the desert
of the Dead Sea region into a fruitful land full of flowers and fish!
This motif is a common poetic image in the prophets of the new creation. It's rooted in the creation narrative
of Genesis 1-2 where the chaotic, dark wilderness (Gen. 1:2) that is uninhabitable (Gen. 2:5-6) is transformed

Class Notes: Ezekiel

238 of 249

into a lush garden (Gen. 1-2) that contains the head of a huge river that enriches the known world (
Gen. 2:10-14).
The Zion psalms (Ps. 46-48, see also Ps. 36) depict the temple with this symbolic-poetic imagery to describe
Yahweh as the source of all life.
Later prophets use these images (desert into garden) of future hope (Isa. 41:17-20, 44:1-5; Joel 3:17-18;
Zech. 14:8-9), or they reverse the images (garden into desert) as an image of the day of Yahweh (Joel 2:3;
Jer. 4:24-26).
This was a common motif in ancient Near Eastern conceptions of temples as a meeting place of Heaven and
Earth and as sources of divine life that enrich the world with fertility. (Below: image of Ashurbanipal’s royal
garden with temple atop the hill, 7th century B.C.E.)

SPL. National Geographic.

Ezekiel’s vision is about the heavenly temple as the source of divine life that will flow out of Yahweh’s
presence and transform all creation. Even though he portrays this restoration only within the framework of
Israel’s promised land, this localized image is itself a picture of cosmic restoration. The Eden river (
Gen. 2:10-14) was the source of life to the known kingdoms of the world (Egypt, Assyria, Babylon). It's this
universal meaning that John the visionary adopts from Ezekiel in his depiction of the new Jerusalem in
Revelation 21-22.

The New Allocation of the Land
In Ezekiel 47:13-48:29, Ezekiel depicts a new division and allotment of land according to boundaries and equal
divisions that never existed historically before or after him. It is theological geography with symmetry
designed to emphasize key themes.
The order and placement of the tribes reflects an ancestral grading system. The tribes from Jacob’s
concubines (Dan, Asher, Naphtali, Gad) are placed furthest from the sanctuary, while those descended from
his two wives are placed equally on both sides of it. This results in a reordering of location that departs from
any historical reality.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

239 of 249

Ezekiel 47:13-14 emphasizes equality. The historical locations of the tribes were the result of many
complicated factors and mixed motives of different tribes (Dan relocated to found a new temple, Judges 17-21
; the Transjordan tribes had mixed motives, Num. 32; the Northern tribes seceded after Solomon, 1 Kgs. 11-12).
Ezekiel 45:8-9 emphasizes security. Ezekiel’s vision ensures the land will forever remain a tribal possession; it
will not be seized by the monarchy for abuse as it was so many times in Israel’s history (e.g., Naboth’s
vineyard, 1 Kgs. 21).
Ezekiel 47:21-23 emphasizes the inclusion of the nations. Ezekiel surprisingly depicts gentiles and immigrants
who take up permanent residence among Israel as eligible for possession of the ancestral lands. This is
tantamount to full inclusion in the covenant people, as dramatic as Isaiah’s statement in Isaiah 56:1-8.

The New Jerusalem and Its Gates
The naming of the gates of the new city in Ezekiel 48:30-35 had precedence earlier in Israel’s history (
2 Kgs. 14:13; Jer. 37:13), but Ezekiel’s is a schematic representation of all of the tribes.
The city is a perfect square (Ezek. 48:30-35), as is the temple at its center, and in that center is the glorious
presence of Yahweh that Ezekiel saw in Babylon at the beginning of the book (Ezek. 1:3). The book comes full
circle, depicting the reunion of Heaven and Earth in the new creation with Jerusalem as the symbolic center
of Yahweh’s redemptive work.

The Name of the City
The name of the city in Ezekiel 48:35 is not, contrary to most contemporary translations, “Yahweh is there.”
That translation would require the Hebrew Yahweh sham )‫(יהוה שם‬, and that is not what the Hebrew of Ezekiel
48:35 says! There is a modifying suffix on “there” called a directional heh, (an -ah attached to the end of a
word) which directs attention away from the perspective of the speaker: Yahweh shammah )‫(יהוה שמה‬.
“the skies” )‫(השמים‬, “toward the skies” )‫השמימה‬, see Gen. 15:5)
“the house” )‫(הבית‬, “toward/into the house” )‫הביתה‬, see Gen. 43:16)
“there” )‫(שם‬, “over there/to there” )‫שמה‬, see Gen. 19:20)
When the noun “there” )‫ שם‬/ sham) is used with the directional heh, it always means “over there” )‫(שמה‬.
Ezekiel 1:20 NASB*
Wherever the Spirit was, the living-beings went toward there/over there )‫ (שמה‬...
Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Jeremiah 27:22 NASB*
They will be carried to Babylon and they will be over there )‫ (שמה‬until the day I visit them ...
Key Words Adapted by Teacher

The point of all of this is that the name of the city is “Yahweh is over there,” which points to the temple at the
center of the land. In other words, Yahweh is not in the city, but “over there” in the temple. The city has
become a symbolic pointer to the dwelling place of Yahweh in the temple. This is a huge departure from the

Class Notes: Ezekiel

240 of 249

David-Zion traditions, where Zion is equivalent with the palace of the Davidic king and with the temple.
Ezekiel’s critique of the monarchy is connected to this total separation of the temple from the power of the
monarchy. It is Yahweh’s presence and authority alone that stand at the center of the land.
“When used in texts such as Genesis 19:20, 22; 21:13, and Jeremiah 18:2, the Hebrew shammah points to a
place one anticipates visiting, a destination. The name of Ezekiel’s city thus suggests it is the rendezvous
point for those on their way to the divine presence. ‘The Lord whom you see is that-a-way'—the city is a key
waypoint or port of call for pilgrims seeking to draw near to God.”
Cook, Stephen L. (2018). Ezekiel 38-48: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. Yale
University Press. 297.

Appendix: Crucial Factors in Interpreting Ezekiel’s Temple Vision
Historical Context
The vision is the final dated oracle in the book of Ezekiel (see 48:35, 40:1). It is dated to first day of a new year,
25 years after Jehoiachin’s deportation (597 B.C.E.), 14 years after the destruction of Jerusalem (586 B.C.E.),
and 10 years after his salvation oracles began (as noted in 48:35, 33:21-22), that is, in the year 572 B.C.E.
However interpreters integrate Ezekiel’s vision into their larger synthesis of biblical eschatology, we must take
this primary context seriously. This vision is first and foremost a message from Ezekiel to his contemporaries
in exile, and part of the Hebrew Bible’s message to post-exilic Israel back in Jerusalem.
Twenty-five years is half of a Jubilee cycle (referred to in Ezek. 48:35; 46:17), and the 10th day of the first
month is precisely the day that the preparations for Passover begin (see Ezek. 48:35; Exod. 12:3). Both
Passover and the Jubilee are deeply connected to the story of Yahweh’s liberation of his people and his land
from slavery (see Ezek. 48:35; Exod. 12-13; Lev. 25).

Literary Genre
This final vision is called “visions of Elohim” (‫מראות אלהים‬, Ezek. 40:2). This is the same title given to his earlier
visions of the divine throne-chariot (Ezek. 1:1-3) and of his virtual tour of the Jerusalem temple (8:1). Those
visions are explicitly placed “in-between the skies and the land” (Ezek. 8:3), which is a biblical way of referring
to what we would call an “alternate dimension” of reality, which explains the many symbolic and surreal
features of his visionary experiences.
He devours an entire scroll written with divine words (Ezek. 2:8-3:3).
He was seized by his hair and transported to Jerusalem (Ezek. 8:3).
He digs through walls and enters secret rooms of the temple (Ezek. 8:8).
He sees multiple scenes of Israelite idolatrous worship happening simultaneously, even though they
actually happened over the course of many years. Manasseh’s Asherah statue of Ezekiel 8:5 was already
torn down by Josiah in the time before Ezekiel, yet he sees it as present in the moment. The Tammuz

Class Notes: Ezekiel

241 of 249

rituals are also described by Jeremiah (Jer. 7:18), but happened decades after the time of Manasseh and
Josiah.
He sees angelic messengers of destruction touring about the city marking some people’s foreheads and
destroying others. This event is a symbolic depiction of the remnant who is spared from the Babylonian
onslaught, while others will be killed in the siege and attack on the city (see Ezek. 9). Ezekiel also sees
divine fire from the throne chariot thrown down upon the city.
Ezekiel “sees” the divine glory leave the temple and Jerusalem and cross the valley of Kidron and go
over the Mount of Olives (Ezek. 11:22-25).
Ezekiel’s “divine visions” are apocalyptic experiences in which he gains access to the heavens where he “sees”
a world of symbols that give him new perspective on earthly events. These visions are packed with heavy
doses of symbolism steeped in earlier biblical imagery (cosmic creation, Eden, Sinai, Jerusalem, and temple).
Whatever interpretive principles we use to understand the symbolism of Ezekiel 1 and 8-11, it is only consistent
that we approach Ezekiel 40-48 with the same expectations.

Biblical Theme
Ezekiel’s temple vision is the culmination of a core biblical theme that began in Genesis 1-2 and is developed
throughout the Hebrew Bible.
1. The Cosmic Temple
Genesis 1:1-2:3 depicts creation as the separation and organization of a three-tiered cosmos (the skies, the
land, the abyss under the land) in which Heaven and Earth are joined together through the image of God—
humanity as God’s royal-priests.
The seven-day scheme and the sequence from chaos to cosmos, the placement of the divine image on the
land, these details (and many more) portray creation as a cosmic temple.
2. Eden as Proto-Temple
Eden is portrayed as a high mountain garden where Heaven and Earth overlap, and the place to which God
elevates humanity to learn wisdom and the fear of the Lord so they can rule the world as God’s partners.
Genesis 1-2 depict a divine ideal for the cosmos as a place where Heaven and Earth are distinct realms that
overlap and are bound together in harmony.
3. The Promised Land, Mount Moriah, and Bethel
The land of Canaan is depicted as an Eden-like land, to which Abraham is elevated out of the “fire of the
Chaldeans (Gen. 11:27-32). It is a place where he meets with God on high mountains and by sacred trees, and
is blessed by God (Gen. 12:1-9, 13:12-18).
Because of Abraham and Sarah’s sin against Hagar (Gen. 16), God requires the surrender of Abraham’s
firstborn sons (Ishmael in Gen. 21 and Isaac in Gen. 22). On Mount Moriah (proto-Zion) God provides a
substitute offering that both redeems the chosen son and dies for the sins of Abraham and Sarah.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

242 of 249

God meets Jacob at Bethel (Gen. 28:10-20), where he has an apocalyptic vision of Heaven and Earth
overlapping in a field. He sees the ramp that connects Heaven and Earth, and he receives a promise that God
will restore him to this Eden-like land after his long exile. Note that Jacob encounters angelic boundaryguards when he re-enters the land (Gen. 32:1-2).
4. Mount Sinai
In the burning bush (Exod. 3), on Mount Horeb/Sinai, Moses encounters a divine-human figure in the middle
of a fiery tree, and the space is called “holy ground.” This will become the same place where Israel will come
to meet with Yahweh (Exod. 19) who will appear in cloud, wind, and fire (Exod. 19-20).
5. The tabernacle
6. The Jordan River
7. Jerusalem, Zion, the temple

Ezekiel and the Exodus Narrative
The structure of much of this vision seems to intentionally recall the broad narrative structure of the Exodus
and Sinai narratives. [Adapted from Block, Daniel (2013). “Envisioning the Good News: Ten Interpretive Keys to
Ezekiel’s Final Vision.” In Beyond the River Chebar: Studies in Kingship and Eschatology in the Book of Ezekiel
(1st ed., pp. 175-196). The Lutterworth Press. 163-164.]

Exodus

Ezekiel’s Restoration

Narrative

Oracles

Yahweh commissions a human agent.

Exod. 3–4

Ezek. 33

Yahweh separates Israel from the nations and delivers

Exod. 5–13

Ezek. 34–37

Exod. 14–15

Ezek. 38–39

Yahweh appears on a high mountain.

Exod. 19

Ezek. 40:1–4

Yahweh provides for his residence among his people.

Exod. 25–40

Ezek. 40:5–43:27

Yahweh prescribes the appropriate response to his

Leviticus

Ezek. 44:1–46:24

Num. 34–35

Ezek. 47–48

Feature

her from bondage.

Enemy forces challenge Yahweh’s salvific work on his
people’s behalf.

grace.

Yahweh provides for the apportionment of his land to his

Ezekiel Mirrors Exodus. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

Class Notes: Ezekiel

243 of 249

Feature

Exodus

Ezekiel’s Restoration

Narrative

Oracles

people.

Ezekiel Mirrors Exodus. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

The Relationship Between Ezekiel’s Torah and Moses’ Torah
There are similarities between the divine revelations Ezekiel and Moses receive. They are both received on
high mountains to be given to the people after the making of a covenant, both focus on temple and priestly
concerns with Levites and an elite family of priests, the presence of Yahweh is manifest in divine cloud, and
neither Ezekiel nor Moses get to personally experience the promised land.
There are also differences. The priestly line is different (Zadok vs. Aaron Ezek. 43:19, Ezek. 44:15), the priestly
garments are different (44:17-19); there are no temple furnishings; and there are different offerings (e.g., New
Moon in 46:6-7 vs. Num. 28:11).

Earlier References
These are not the only places Ezekiel pointed forward to Israel’s new worship temple. He developed this
theme in Ezekiel 20:32-45 and Ezekiel 37:26-28 and the images from those texts need to be taken into
account here.

Symbolic and Stylized Elements in the Vision
Some elements in Ezekiel’s vision stretch the imagination or represent a clearly symbolic ideal.
1. The “high mountain” (Ezek. 40:2, never named as Jerusalem) where the temple is located is a clear
"Eden,” "Zion,” and “Sinai” motif. The fact that all of these distinct sacred mountain spaces can be
merged together into one geographical place means that we are dealing with a transcendent “space”
where Heaven and Earth overlap. (Jerusalem sits on a ridge 2,500 feet above sea level and is
overshadowed by the Mount of Olives to the east; these are clearly poetic descriptions; Zaphon in
Ps. 48:2 was the Canaanite version of the Greek Mount Olympus, see also Isa. 2:2 and Mic. 4:1).
2. The river flowing out of the temple (Ezek. 47) was never a reality (Ps. 46:4; Joel 3:18; Zech. 14:8).
3. The structure is highly symbolic. This was true of the tabernacle and temple as well, but in this structure
even more so.
“The plan of the city is idealized as a perfect square with three gates punctuating each side to provide
admittance for the twelve tribes. The emphasis on the twelve tribes itself reverses five centuries of history.
The apportionment of the land of Israel among the tribes to a large extent disregards topographic and
historical realities. The dimensions of the temple and the city are dominated by multiples of five, with

Class Notes: Ezekiel

244 of 249

twenty-five being a particularly common number. All in all Ezekiel’s scheme appears highly contrived,
casting doubt on any interpretation that expects a literal fulfillment of his plan.”
Block, Daniel (1998). The Book of Ezekiel, Chapters 25-48 (The New International Commentary on the Old
Testament). Eerdmans.

Reception of This Vision in Judaism and Christianity
Ezekiel’s plan was apparently not read or received as a literal program of restoration by anyone in the postexilic community (Ezra-Nehemiah shows a desire to restore Israel according to the Mosaic Torah, not Ezekiel’s:
no land redivision, no "prince," the temple was not built according to Ezekiel’s description).
When John the visionary depicts the new creation in Revelation 21-22, he is clearly adopting language and
imagery from Ezekiel 40-48 (John’s vision is on a “high mountain” in 21:10; a new Jerusalem in which God
dwells in 21:11; the heavenly guide with a measuring rod in 21:15-17; symmetrical plan for the city in 21:11-21;
river of life in 22:1), but never literally. He adapts Ezekiel’s images for his own rhetorical and theological
purposes.
John names the city as the new Jerusalem (Rev. 21:2) where Ezekiel leaves it unnamed to separate it
from its past (40:2), and later renames it “Yahweh is there” (48:35).
John’s city emphatically has no temple (Rev. 21:22), which is a theological impossibility for Ezekiel,
where it’s at the center of the land.
Sacrifices: Ezekiel portrays a fully functioning sacrificial system run by Zadokite priestly staff. In
Revelation this would be a theological contradiction as the lamb has already been slain (Rev. 21:22).
City residents: In John, believers are purified by the sacrifice of the Lamb of God (Rev. 7:14), while in
Ezekiel there is continued need to distinguish pure from impure.
The nations: In Ezekiel, there is a purely ethnic-Israelite focus, but in Revelation the scope of the
renewal is for all nations (cross reference the leaves of the tree in Ezek. 47:12 and Rev. 22:2).

Ezekiel's Other Visions
Ezekiel contains numerous visionary experiences that were clearly symbolic explorations of theological
realities.
Eating the scroll in 2:1-3:15 symbolizes accepting the message of judgment and internalizing its reality
as mediator.
Consider the symbolism of throwing fire on Jerusalem and the symbolic “slaughter” in Ezekiel 9:1-11.
Re-creating the dry bones into new humans in Ezekiel 37 is a promise of national covenant renewal.
Ezekiel 40-48 is a similar visionary exploration of the meaning and hope of Yahweh’s return to his
people and what kinds of realities will exist when God dwells among his people.

Main Interpretive Views of Ezekiel’s Temple
A Blueprint for the Eschaton

Class Notes: Ezekiel

245 of 249

This view holds that Ezekiel's temple vision describes an actual temple to be built when the Messiah returns to
restore Jerusalem and rebuild the messianic kingdom.
There are several problems with this view.
There is no basis in the New Testament for the hope of a restored temple in Jerusalem. Any texts that
might be appealed to are fraught with interpretive challenges and are by no means a clear anticipation
of a new temple that should be associated with Christian hope.
In the depiction of the new creation in Revelation 21:22, it is very clear that there is no centralized
temple because the entire creation is filled with God’s presence.
The gospels portray Jesus as the ultimate reality to which the physical temple pointed (John 2:13-22).
Jesus acted and spoke as if he played the role of the temple (offering forgiveness, Mark 2:1-13; healing
and purifying the unclean, Mark 5:24-34; receiving worship, Matt. 14:33).
The rest of the New Testament portrays “the body of Christ,” i.e., the community of Jesus’ followers, as
the body of the Messiah, that is, as a temple (John 7:37-39; Acts 2:1-4; 1 Cor. 3:16–17; 1 Pet. 2:4–10).
The restored temple in Ezekiel 40-48 presumes an Israel that still sins and requires sacrifices of
atonement for their sins. This stands in tension with a vision of the restored Israel as fully obedient to
God’s will (Ezek. 36:22-36) and also with the idea that Jesus’ death and resurrection provided an
ultimate and unrepeatable act of cosmic atonement (as in Heb. 8-10).

A Symbolic Ideal
This view holds that these chapters are part of Ezekiel’s prophetic message of challenge and hope (Ezek. 40:4
, 43:10-12) aimed at generating repentance. He depicts an idealized temple using “symbolic geography and
architecture” to convey his prophetic message; it was not intended for precise historical reference or as a
blueprint for those attempting to build a future temple.
The location of the temple (“a very high mountain”, Ezek. 40:2) is symbolic. “High mountain” = symbolic
connection point between Heaven and Earth. The temple is heavenly and already exists, and it doesn’t need
to be built.
The city-temple complex is over one mile wide and a perfect square, a magnified version of the holy of holies
(Ezek. 48:17, 48:35).
There is a river coming from the temple mount (Ezek. 47:1–12). It is a symbolic stream that plays a similar role
to the four-headed river from Eden (Gen. 2:10-14).
The image of priests offering continuing sacrifices (Ezek. 45) and of the messianic “prince” having sin
offerings made on his behalf (Ezek. 45:22) is inconsistent with the New Testament theology of the finality of
Christ’s sacrificial death (Heb. 9–10).

Territorial Rhetoric (Utopian Vision)
At multiple points in the visions, Ezekiel is told the purpose of his being shown these spaces and what he is
supposed to do with all that he sees and writes down.
Ezekiel 40:1-4 and 43:1-11 make it clear that Ezekiel’s vision was originally addressed to an exilic audience, and
it was designed to have a rhetorical impact on their view of the hoped for restoration and on their view of

Class Notes: Ezekiel

246 of 249

themselves before Yahweh.
“If Ezekiel 40-48 do not provide a construction blueprint for the post-exilic temple, is this temple intended
to be only a literary creation, a symbol for the universal presence of God? ... What would be the rhetorical
purpose of producing a text in the Babylonian exile which organizes post-exilic Israel around a temple if
Ezekiel didn’t expect the returned Israel to have a temple? I find it incomprehensible that Ezekiel could
imagine a society without a temple at the symbolic center of the society. Rather than a choice between a
building plan or a symbolic metaphor, there is a third option: it is territorial rhetoric ... This text calls for
radical social change, by reorganizing Israel’s entire geography around Yahweh’s presence. Every space
that was distorted and abused by Israel’s priests and kings has been reshaped and made subordinate to
Yahweh’s presence in the land.”
Stevenson, Kalinda Rose (1996). The Vision of Transformation: The Territorial Rhetoric of Ezekiel 40-48.
Scholars Press. 151-153.
“Sir Thomas More in 1516 invented the term ‘utopia’ by playing on two Greek prefixes, ou and eu. The prefix
ou means ‘no/not’ and eu means ‘good/well.' Combined with the Greek word topos, which means ‘place’ a
utopia is thus, at once a place of well-being and a fictive non-place. What More’s utopia is not, contrary to
widespread usage, is a perfect place. And neither is Ezekiel’s ideal temple and land. Ezekiel’s utopia is not
yet the full realization of God’s reign over the new creation. Access to the temple is still limited to only the
priests, sacrifices of atonement for sins are still necessary, and the ideal David of Ezekiel 34:23-24 and 37:25
is a far cry from the diminished “chief” of Ezekiel 40-48. In particular, Israel’s promised future heart
transplant is not presupposed (Ezek. 11:19-20 and 36:26-27); atonement offerings would not be necessary if
it had already taken place. A literary utopia of More’s type is a means of social critique, which must grapple
persuasively with the continuing struggles and tragedies of real life. A literary utopia thus keeps at least
one foot in the problematic world of the present ... The original island of Utopia described by More in his
book of 1516 was not futuristic or eschatological, but an engaging critique of contemporary England.
Similarly, Ezekiel 40-48 is not a vision of a future God-given reality, which readers must fit into all of God’s
other plans for earth’s destiny. Neither is it a blueprint for an actual, realistic temple slated for human
construction ... It is a revolutionary text designed to challenge the status quo as Israel looked forward to its
return from Babylon.”
Cook, Stephen L. (2018). Ezekiel 38-48: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. Yale
University Press. 5-6.

The River from the Garden of Eden

Class Notes: Ezekiel

247 of 249

The River from the Garden of Eden. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel
(2021).

Reflection Question
How do you make sense of all the different images of rivers, cities, trees, temples, and mountains layered in
visions like Ezekiel 40-48?

Class Notes: Ezekiel

248 of 249

Session 29: Reflecting on Ezekiel

Key Takeaways
Prophetic literature is some of the most challenging to interpret and requires wisdom to engage it well.
But it provides a lifetime’s worth of meditation and reflection.
Ezekiel demonstrates a faithful response to God’s calling. He lives out a parable of God’s message to his
people, trusting that God would bring about everything he said he would.
The book of Ezekiel invites us to walk about the story of Israel with God and to consider the height,
width, and breadth of God’s love and faithfulness in bringing his people through exile into new life in his
presence.

This session has no notes

Reflection Question
Take some time to reflect on the insights you learned in this class.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

249 of 249

