Session 20: New Heart, New Spirit

Key Takeaways
Defiling or profaning something is to take something holy and treat it as though it is common.
Israel’s violence and injustice have profaned God’s holy name, making it appear to the nations that
Yahweh is unjust and powerless.
God will restore Israel and give the people a new heart and his own Spirit. By doing this, he will
demonstrate his character to the world.
God accomplishes his purposes by enabling his human partners to participate in God’s own life by his
Spirit.

Translation and Literary Design of Ezekiel 36:16-38

16 Then the word of Yahweh came to me saying,
17 “Son of a human,

the house of Israel was living in their own land,
and they made it impure through their ways and their deeds;
like the impurity of menstrual blood , so their ways were before me,
18 and I poured out on them my hot-anger,

because of the blood which they had spilled on the land,
and because they had made it impure with their dung-balls.
19 And I scattered them among the nations ,

and they were dispersed throughout the lands .
According to their ways and their deeds I judged them.

20 “And they went to the nations where they went,

and they profaned

my

holy

name ,

because it was said of them,
‘These are the people of Yahweh,
yet they have come out of his land.’
21 But I had concern for my

holy

name ,

which the house of Israel had profaned
among the nations where they went.

Class Notes: Ezekiel

158 of 249

22 Therefore say to the house of Israel,

‘Thus says Yahweh Elohim,
“ It is not for your sake , O house of Israel, that I am about to act ,
but for the sake of my

holy

name which you have profaned

among the nations where you went.
23 I will demonstrate the holiness of my great name ,

which has been profaned

among the nations ,

which you have profaned in their midst,
and the nations will know that I am Yahweh,”
declares Yahweh Elohim,
“when I demonstrate myself as

holy among you in their eyes.

24 And I will take you from the nations ,

and I will gather you from all the lands ,
and I will bring you into your own land .

25 And I will sprinkle pure water on you,

and you will be purified from all your impurities ,
and I will purify you from all your idols,

26 and I will give you a new

and a new

heart ,

spirit I will put within you,

and I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh,
and I will give you a heart of flesh.
27 and my Spirit I will put within you,

and I will make it so that you will walk in my statutes,
and you will keep and do what I decide,
28 you will live in the land that I gave to your fathers,

and you will be my people,
and I will be your Elohim.

29 And I will rescue you from all your impurities ,

and I will call for the grain and multiply it,
and I will not bring a famine on you,
30 and I will multiply the fruit of the tree and the produce of the field,

so that you will not receive again the disgrace of famine among the nations .

31 And you will remember your evil ways and your deeds that were not good,

and you will despise yourselves before your face for your iniquities and your abominations,

32 I am not doing this for your sake ,”

Class Notes: Ezekiel

159 of 249

declares Yahweh Elohim,
"Let that be known to you!
Be ashamed and humiliated for your ways, O house of Israel!”

33 Thus says Yahweh Elohim,

“On the day that I purify you from all your iniquities,
I will cause the cities to be inhabited ,
and the waste places will be rebuilt ,
34 and the desolate land will be worked ,

instead of being a desolation in the eyes of all who pass by,

35 and they will say ,

‘This desolate land has become like the garden of Eden ,
and the wasted, desolate and torn down cities are fortified and inhabited .’
36 and

the nations that are remaining round about you,

they will know that I, Yahweh,
I have rebuilt the torn down places,
I have planted what was desolate.
I, Yahweh, have spoken and will do it.”

37 Thus says Yahweh Elohim,

“This also I will let the house of Israel ask me to do for them:
I will make them multiply like a flock of humans,
38 like a flock of holy ones ,

like a flock at Jerusalem during her appointed times,
so will the wasted cities be filled with flocks of humans.
And they will know that I am Yahweh.”’”

Ezekiel 36:16-38. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

Restoration for the Failed Covenant Partners
This is a retelling of the story of Israel’s fall into exile, but from Yahweh's perspective and highlighting the
effect Israel's exile had on his reputation among the nations.
Yahweh’s “holy name” and reputation was “defiled” by Israel’s apostasy and exile (Ezek. 36:20-21). The fate of
nations was popularly linked to the fate of their national deity (see the same logic from the lips of an Assyrian
commander in 2 Kgs. 18:33-35). Israel’s exile meant Yahweh was perceived as merely a tribal god who lost to
Marduk and couldn’t defend his people (remember Moses’ appeal to the same logic in Exod. 32:12; Num. 14:16
).
Yahweh will restore Israel to “hallow” his name (Ezek. 36:22-24). Restoration from exile will not depend on the
quality of Israel’s repentance. Rather, it will be purely driven by Yahweh’s desire to be known truly among the

Class Notes: Ezekiel

160 of 249

nations as the creator and redeemer God of all nations (note Jesus’ allusion to this line in the Lord’s prayer in
Matt. 6:9).
The restoration is a multifaceted divine response to Israel’s fate (themes drawn from Deut. 30).
Ezekiel 36:24: restoration to the promised land
Ezekiel 36:25: ceremonial cleansing from moral impurity (borrowing language from Num. 19, the
ceremony of the red heifer)

A New Heart and Spirit
In Ezekiel 36:26-27, God says he will give his people a new heart and spirit. “Heart” (Heb. lev) is the center of
will and emotion, and “spirit” (Heb. ruakh) is the animating life energy, which is then qualified as “my Spirit in
you” which will enable Israel to obey the terms of the covenant (from Lev. 26:3; the theme here is entirely
drawn from Deut. 30:1-10 and explored later by Paul in Rom. 7-8).
Ezekiel expresses a theme that echoes in other literature from the period of exile.
Jeremiah 31:18-19 NASB
I have surely heard Ephraim grieving, “You have chastised me, and I was chastised, like an untrained calf;
bring me back that I may turn back, for you are the LORD my God. For after I turned back, I repented.”
Jeremiah 32:38-40 NASB
They shall be my people, and I will be their God; and I will give them one heart and one way, that they may
fear me always, for their own good and for the good of their children after them. I will make an everlasting
covenant with them that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; and I will put the fear of me in
their hearts so that they will not turn away from me.
Lamentations 5:21 NASB
Restore us to you, O LORD, that we may be restored; Renew our days as of old ...
“God will no longer gamble with Israel as he did in old times, and Israel rebelled against him; in the future—
no more experiments! God will put his spirit into them, he will alter their hearts (their minds) and make it
impossible for them to be anything but obedient to his rules and his commandments. The declaration
abandons all hope that Israel, in her present condition, can achieve the ideals of covenant relationship
originally intended by Yahweh. The status quo can be altered only by direct divine intervention.”
Greenberg, Moshe (1995). “Three Conceptions of Torah in the Hebrew Bible.” Studies in the Bible and
Jewish Thought. Jewish Publication Society.
In 36:28-30, Ezekiel takes the covenant restoration blessings from Leviticus 26:42-45 and turns them into
promises of future hope.

Shame and Hope
Class Notes: Ezekiel

161 of 249

While Yahweh has removed the public disgrace of Israel among the nations (36:15 Heb. kelimmah = public
dishonor), Israel before the exile was unable to experience guilt-shame for its covenant faithlessness (for more
on this motif see Jer. 3:3, 6:15, 8:12; Heb. bosh and qut, same as used in 36:31-32). Paradoxically, Yahweh’s
salvation will instill a proper moral awareness that can feel healthy guilt for wrongdoing (similar to Paul’s selfawareness in 1 Tim. 1:15).
The exiles will return, rebuild, and restore the land to Eden-like conditions, and all for the purpose of the
nations paying attention and acknowledging Yahweh (Ezek. 36:33-38).

Holy Versus Common

Holy Vs. Common. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

The Waters and the Spirit

Class Notes: Ezekiel

162 of 249

The Waters and the Spirit. Illustration created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Ezekiel (2021).

Reflection Question
How does God plan to restore the reputation of his name among the nations?

Class Notes: Ezekiel

163 of 249

