Session 2: Proliferation and Oppression

Key Takeaways
Exodus 1 is littered with vocabulary recalling themes from Genesis.
Pharaoh, who considers himself a god, inverts the human vocation of being an image bearer who rules
with justice and wisdom.
From the first chapter, Exodus highlights the role of women in resisting injustice.

Creation Echoes
Genesis 1:28 Instructor's Translation
Be fruitful [prh] and multiply [rbh], fill [mlʾ] the land [ʾrṣ] and subdue it. Rule over the fish of the sea and
over birds of the heavens and over every living creature that roams upon the land.
Exodus 1:7 Instructor's Translation
But the children of Israel were fruitful [prh] and they swarmed [šrṣ; cf. Gen. 1:20-21; 9:7] and they increased
[rbh] and became very, very [mʾd; Gen. 1:31] numerous, and the land [ʾrṣ] was filled [mlʾ] with them.
Note that in Genesis 1:28, humans are to rule over the fish, birds, and other living creatures. Humans are not
commanded to rule over other humans.

Pharaoh’s Fear
Pharaoh identifies a challenge to his control—the Israelites outnumber his people (Exod. 1:9). His solution is to
keep them from multiplying so that they will not fight him and leave (Exod. 1:10).
His plan to solve this problem takes three forms: harsh labor, murderous midwives, and Nile drowning.
In this chapter, pay attention to who is named and who is not. The Hebrew midwives are named (Exod. 1:15),
even though Pharaoh is not. The midwives’ courage in defying Pharaoh is remembered for all time.

Come, Let Us
Pharaoh repeats the arrogance of the brick makers in Genesis 11, whose city and tower tried to establish their
own fame and avoid being “scattered” (Gen. 11:3-4). God has already demonstrated his commitment to
opposing the proud. In response, God will reverse (Exod. 6:1) Pharaoh’s oppressive policies (Exod. 5:12).

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

8 of 80

Store Cities
The building of ‫( מסכנות‬mishkenot) in Exodus 1:11 mirrors the building of the ‫( משכן‬mishkan, the tabernacle) in
Exodus 25-40. These were likely warehouses with supplies for Pharaoh’s funerary cult, ensuring that Egyptians
would worship him long after his death. YHWH calls the people to build a tabernacle to worship him instead.

Reflection Question
Reflect on the vocabulary links between Exodus 1 and earlier Genesis stories. How would you describe the
way that Exodus 1 recalls earlier stories?

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

9 of 80

