Session 3: Delivering the Deliverer

Key Takeaways
Moses’ deliverance in the reeds anticipates Israel’s deliverance through the Sea of Reeds.
Moses’ deliverance through the waters of the Nile echoes Noah’s deliverance through the waters of the
flood.
Seeing things the way God sees them, as the key women in this narrative do, is a first step toward
trusting God and acting the way he does.

A Tale of Three Daughters
In chapter 2, three daughters introduce a theme of “seeing” that connects back to Genesis and carries on
throughout Exodus.
The daughter of Levi “saw that he was good” (Exod. 2:2).
The baby’s sister “stood at a distance to see what would happen to/for him” (Exod. 2:4).
The daughter of Pharaoh “saw the basket ... saw the baby ... and felt sorry for him” (Exod. 2:5-6).
Language of seeing punctuates the following chapters as God looks on the Israelites in compassion (
Exod. 2:25), sees their misery and suffering (Exod. 3:7), and sees the way the Egyptians are oppressing them (
Exod. 3:9).

Delivery Stool or Birthing Bricks?
In Exodus 1:16, the word abnayim translates to “two stones.” This term has been interpreted several ways. It
could refer to:
Birthing equipment: See Jeremiah 18:3 (potter’s wheel)
Genitalia: This would be the only such occurrence
Birthing stool: Possible, but Pharaoh’s instruction in verse 16 would be strange
Ritual bricks: See Josef Wegner, “Tradition and Innovation: The Middle Kingdom” on birthing bricks
used as a stool and then rearranged for a newborn ritual

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

10 of 80

Reconstruction of the Practice of Childbirth During the Late Middle Kingdom. Wegner, Josef (2010). Tradition
and Innovation: The Middle Kingdom. Academia.edu.

Women Delivering the Deliverer
Midwife, mother, sister, daughter, wife—each woman courageously defies Pharaoh by working within her
sphere of influence to resist injustice.
Shiphrah and Puah (the midwives)
The boy’s mother
The boy’s sister
The daughter of Pharaoh
The maidservants of Pharaoh’s daughter
Zipporah (chapter 4)
Pharaoh had “let the girls live” (Heb. hayah; Exod. 1:16, 22) but women became his greatest threat. Their
“liveliness” (Heb. hayeh) was the reason they kept bearing sons (Exod. 1:19).

Reflection Question
Reflect on the compassion of Pharaoh's daughter in Exodus 2:5-6 and compare it to the description of
Yahweh's compassion in Exodus 2:25. How does this illustrate the possibility of human participation in God’s
work?

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

11 of 80

