Session 16: Law as Mission

Key Takeaways
The Israelites were set free from oppression before they received the law. The law was not a means of
earning God’s compassion or protection.
The law was not a burden. The law was seen as a mark of God’s favor and a special distinction for the
people of Israel.
The law was likely given in duplicate on two tablets, as was common with covenant records, to act as a
witness and reminder for both parties.

Literary Context of the Decalogue
The first question to ask in framing the literary context of the Ten Commandments is what has happened in
the story so far leading up to Sinai? One prominent thing to note is that the law is given after they are already
saved from slavery in Egypt. The law is not Israel’s means of salvation!

Historical Context: How Did the Israelites View the Law?
Deuteronomy 4:5-8 NIV
5

See, I have taught you decrees and laws as the LORD my God commanded me, so that you may follow

them in the land you are entering to take possession of it.

6

Observe them carefully, for this will show your

wisdom and understanding to the nations, who will hear about all these decrees and say, “Surely this great
nation is a wise and understanding people.”

7

What other nation is so great as to have their gods near them

the way the LORD our God is near us whenever we pray to him?

8

And what other nation is so great as to

have such righteous decrees and laws as this body of laws I am setting before you today?
See also Exodus 19:8; 24:3, 7

The law was viewed as a gift of wisdom that set Israel apart from the other nations.

How Many Stone Tablets Were There?
Exodus 31:18 Instructor's Translation
When he finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, he gave to Moses the two tablets of the [covenant]
document (‫)עדות‬, tablets of stone, inscribed by the finger of God.

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

47 of 80

Exodus 32:15 Instructor's Translation
And Moses turned and he went down from the mountain, and the two tablets of the [covenant] document (

‫[ )עדות‬were] in his hand, tablets inscribed on both sides, inscribed on front and back.
Exodus 40:20 Instructor's Translation
And he took and he set the [covenant] document (‫ )עדות‬into the ark …

What Is the Significance of Having Two Tablets?
Historical context provides insight into the practice of providing duplicate copies in a covenant ritual. In this
excerpt from the treaty between Suppiluliuma and Shattiwaza, each party retains a copy to place in their
temple so the gods can be witnesses and guarantors of the agreement.
“A duplicate of this tablet has been deposited before the sun-goddess of Arinna, because the sun-goddess
of Arinna regulates kingship and queenship. In Mitanni land [a duplicate] has been deposited before
Teshub, the lord of the [sanctuary] of Kahat. At regular [intervals] shall they read it in the presence of the
king of the Mitanni land and in the presence of the sons of the Hurri country.”
Kitchen, Kenneth A. and Lawrence, Paul J. N. (2012). Treaty, Law and Covenant in the Ancient Near East.
Harrassowitz. No. 56A, 1.391.

Reflection Question
What new insights have you gained about how the law functions in this narrative or in the biblical story?

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

48 of 80

