Session 11: Sea Crossing

Key Takeaways
The Hebrew phrase yam suph, often translated as “Red Sea,” translates literally to “reed sea.”
When the number of Israelites crossing the sea is translated as “600,000 men” plus families, it creates
challenges with other parts of the text.
There are a variety of views that attempt to harmonize the exodus account in the Bible with other
biblical evidence and the archaeological record.

What Body of Water Did the Israelites Cross?
Hebrew: yam suph = “Sea of Reeds”
Greek translation: eruthran thalassan = “Red Sea”
Both “gulfs,” the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba, were yam suph
Some scholars think it became the “red” sea because each of the cardinal directions (north, south, east,
and west) was associated with a color (Black Sea is north, Red Sea is south, etc.) From Smithsonian
Journeys.
First mention of the Sea of Reeds: Exodus 10:19; 13:18; 15:4; 15:22; 23:31 (e.g., 1 Kings 9:26 shows that
Ezion-geber is on the shore of yam suph, too)

Sea of Reeds in the Literary Design of Exodus
The Hebrew name Sea of Reeds forges an important connection with the deliverance story of the infant
Moses, whose mother placed him among the “reeds” in the Nile, and whose name means “one who draws
out.”
Just as Moses passed through the reeds to escape death by Pharaoh’s hand, so the Israelites passed through
the Sea of Reeds to escape death by Pharaoh’s hand.

How Many Hebrews Left Egypt?
English translations say “600,000 men” plus families (Exod. 12:37), but this translation creates some historical
challenges.
That would likely mean over 2 million Israelites total, however, the archaeological record doesn’t show
evidence for this size of population, in either Egypt or Canaan at that time. Furthermore, how could 12
brothers become 600,000 men in four generations (Exod. 6:14-25)?

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

34 of 80

Other logistical problems arise when considering the size of the camp and the length of time needed to cross
the Sea of Reeds.

Making Sense of the Numbers
There are several options for reconciling this verse with the historical record.
Archaeologists could be wrong, and the 600,000 number is correct.
The numbers are rhetorical or symbolic.
Numbers multiplied by 10 for rhetorical reasons (Allen, 1990). This accounts for round numbers
that fit with the exact number of firstborns in relation to the Levites.
Numbers represent the population during a later period (Fretheim, 1991). This is a way of affirming
that later Israelites were participants in the exodus event.
The phrase is mistranslated and should read “600 military units” plus families.

Translating ‘Eleph
Hebrew does not use numerals, but instead spells out numbers in full. ‫ = ְּכ ֵׁש ׁש־ֵמ אֹות ֶא ֶל ף‬Six hundred ‫אלף‬
(ʾeleph) on foot, men without children.
The word ʾeleph has four possible meanings in a Hebrew lexicon.
1. Thousand
2. Head of cattle
3. Military unit
4. Clan (tribal unit smaller than a tribe)
Judges 6:15 NRSV*
"But sir, how can I deliver Israel? My ‫ אלף‬is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my family."
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Joshua 22:14 NRSV*
And with him ten chiefs, one from each of the tribal families of Israel, every one of them the head of a
family among the ‫ אלף‬of Israel.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Reflection Question
Summarize the different views for interpreting the number (600,000) of Israelite men leaving Egypt in
Exodus 12:37.

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

35 of 80

