Session 18: Noah’s Sacrifice and God’s Blessing

Key Takeaways
The reason for the flood—the condition of the human heart—becomes God’s reason to never again flood
the Earth.
Even though the land is cursed, God chooses to never again treat the land as though it is cursed.
Noah is one example in the larger pattern that leads to the ultimate anointed one who will suffer on
behalf of the wicked—a righteous one who will die for the wicked—and make atonement to open the
way back to Eden.

Noah’s Sacrifice and God’s Response: Translation and Literary
Design of Genesis 8:20-22

a 20 And Noah built an altar to Yahweh,
b and he took from every pure animal
b' and from every pure bird
a' and he caused to go up a going-up offering on the altar .

21 And Yahweh smelled the soothing smell;

The Curse Is Rescinded and No Death
a and Yahweh said to his heart ,
b “ I will never again

curse the ground on account of humanity,

a because the purpose of the heart of humanity is bad from his youth;
b'

and I will never again strike all life, as I just did.

Cosmic Order Is Restored
22 For all the days of the land,

seedtime and harvest,
and cold and heat,
and summer and winter,
and day and night
will not stop.”

The Blessing Is Released and Life Is to Bear Fruit and Multiply
And Elohim blessed Noah and his sons

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

123 of 208

and he said to them,
"Be fruitful and multiply and fill the land."

Genesis 8:20-22. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom Adam to Noah
(2020).

The Hero’s Sacrifice in Mesopotamian Flood Accounts
The sacrifice of the flood hero motif is preserved in all of the existing Mesopotamian flood narratives.
I set up an offering stand on the top of the mountain.
Seven and seven cult vessels I set out,
I heaped reeds, cedar, and myrtle in their bowls.
The gods smelled the savor,
The gods smelled the sweet savor,
The gods crowded around the sacrificer like flies.
Gilgamesh Epic, Tablet 11
He put down [ ... ],
Provided food [ ... ]
[ ... ]
The gods smelt the fragrance,
Gathered like flies over the offering.
Atrahasis Epic, Tablet 3
(140 ́) Ziusudra, being the king,
stepped up before Utu kissing the ground (before him).
The king was butchering oxen, was being lavish with the sheep [barley cak]es, crescents together with [ ... ]
[ ... ] he was crumbling for him
[ ... ]
[juniper, the pure plant of the
mountains] he filled [on the fire]
Eridu Genesis
He disembarked, accompanied by his wife and his daughter together with the steersman. He prostrated
himself in worship to the earth and set up an altar and sacrificed to the gods.
Berossus’ Babylonica
However, the function and result of the offering in the Mesopotamian accounts is different. This theme
receives the most treatment in the Gilgamesh Epic.

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

124 of 208

The gods crowded around the sacrificer like flies.
As soon as Belet-ili arrived,
She held up the great fly-ornaments that Anu had made her in his infatuation, “O these gods here, as surely
as I shall not forget this lapis on my neck,
I shall be mindful of these days, and not forget, forever!
Let the gods come to the offering,
But Enlil must not come to the offering,
For he, unreasoning, brought on the deluge,
And reckoned my people for destruction!”
Suddenly, as Enlil arrived,
He saw the boat, Enlil became angry,
He was filled with fury at the gods.
“Who came out alive? No man was to survive destruction!”
Ninurta made ready to speak, and said to the warrior Enlil,
“Who but Ea could devise such a thing?
For Ea alone knows every craft.”
Ea made ready to speak, and said to the warrior Enlil,
“You, O warrior, are the sage of the gods,
How could you, unreasoning, have brought on the deluge?
Impose punishment on the sinner for his sin,
On the transgressor for his transgression ...”
Gilgamesh Epic, Tablet 11
The goddess Belet-ili holds up her fancy fly jewel necklace as a reminder to the gods that the flood
should never happen again. In her speech, she wants the gods to learn a lesson from the flood. The
indiscriminate slaughter of humanity is not in their own best interests because they almost starved
without sacrifices.
The final line shows the gods’ new policy: Each sinner will face the consequences of their own actions.
How different from the theology of the flood story.

Noah’s Sacrifice and the Theology of the Flood Narrative
Like Abel, who was the first human to offer animal sacrifices at the door of Eden (see Gen. 4:7), Noah offers
animal sacrifices at the door of the ark, which was a floating micro-Eden.
Noah’s sacrifice does not placate a volatile and angry deity. Rather, his obedience and faithfulness to God’s
instructions qualify him to be a new ’adam, a royal priest who offers up a valuable sacrifice on behalf of the
new humanity.
Noah’s priestly role was hinted at in Genesis 7:1-3 when he was directed by God to select ritually pure and
impure animals to take onto the ark. Their purpose was not made clear, but now we find that these pure
animals were qualified for a sacrifice of thanks.
Noah’s sacrifice is a “going-up offering” (‘olah / ‫)עולה‬, which is traditionally translated as a “whole burnt
offering” (see the description in Lev. 1). It was the most costly offering because the worshiper did not receive

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

125 of 208

back any parts of the animal for a feast.
The going-up offering is the total surrender of a precious substitute who ascends before God’s heavenly
temple as a righteous and blameless representative to appeal to God on behalf of the offerer. In Noah’s case,
he is already a righteous and blameless person, but his offering is not just for him but for all creation and all
humanity yet to be born.
The result of Noah’s sacrifice is made more clear by recognizing the hyperlinks back to the opening of the
flood story. In Genesis 6:5-6, God states his reasons for bringing the flood.

Bookends of the Flood Narrative
Genesis 6:5-6 Instructor's Translation
5

And Yahweh saw (‫ )וריא יהוה‬that great was the evil of the human in the land and all the purpose of the

plans in his heart was only evil all the day (‫ )כל יצר מחשבות לבו רק רע‬.

6

And Yahweh regretted (‫ )נחם‬that he

made the human in the land, and he was grieved in his heart (‫ )אל לבו‬.
Genesis 8:21 Instructor's Translation
And Yahweh smelled (‫ )וירח יהוה‬the pleasing smell, and Yahweh said to his heart (‫ )אל לבו‬, “I will not
continue to treat as cursed any more the land (‫)האדמה‬, on account of the human (‫)האדם‬, for the purpose of
the heart of the human is evil from his youth (‫ )יצר לב נאדם רע מנעריו‬and I will not continue any more/again
to strike all life as I have done.”
Genesis 8:21 is a hinge-hyperlink text that is reaching back to strategic points in Genesis 1-8 and drawing the
themes together into a coherent whole. Because of Noah’s obedience and atoning sacrifice, God is no longer
going to treat the land as cursed because of humanity’s rebellious evil; rather, he is going to treat it as blessed
despite the grim reality of human evil.
Genesis 8:21 Instructor's Translation
and Yahweh said to his heart (‫)אל לבו‬, “I will not continue to treat as cursed (‫ )לקלל‬the land, on account (

‫ )בעבור‬of the human , for the purpose of the heart of the human is bad from his youth and I will not again
strike all life as I have done .
Genesis 3:17 Instructor's Translation
Cursed (‫ )ארורה‬is the ground on account of you (‫ )בעבורך‬, in grief (‫ )בעצבון‬you will eat from it all the days
of your life.
Genesis 5:29 Instructor's Translation
And he called his name Noah (‫)נוח‬, saying “This one will give us comfort (‫ )נחם‬from our work and from the
grief (‫ )עצבון‬of our hands from the land which Yahweh has cursed” (‫)אררה‬
Genesis 6:5-7a Instructor's Translation
5

And Yahweh saw … that all the purpose of humanity’s heart (‫ )לבו‬was only evil all the day …

was grieved (‫ )ויתעצב‬in his heart (‫… )אל לבו‬

7

6

And Yahweh

and said “I will wipe (‫ )מחה‬away humanity … for I regret (‫)נחם‬

that I have made them … for the land was filled with violence (‫)חמס‬. ”

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

126 of 208

Is There No More Curse on the Ground?
Notice how God’s words in Genesis 8:21b and 8:21d are set in poetic parallelism:
Verse 21b: I will not continue / to curse again

the land , / on account of the human

Verse 21d: I will not continue / again to strike

all life / as I have done

The words curse/strike are set in poetic parallelism, along with the land/all life . This means that “treating as
cursed” has a specific meaning in this context because it is synonymous with the “striking of all life” that took
place in the flood.
There are multiple Hebrew words for “curse.” Two of them appear in Genesis 1-11, and there is an important
difference between them.
1. “To curse” = Hebrew ’arar (‫ )ארר‬means to declare someone’s misfortune/to effect their misfortune.
Genesis 3:14 NASB
The LORD God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this, cursed are you more than all cattle, and
more than every beast of the field; on your belly you will go, and dust you will eat all the days of your life ...”
Genesis 3:17-18 NASB*
17

Then to the human he said ... “Cursed is the ground because of you; in toil you will eat of it all the days of

your life.

18

Both thorns and thistles it shall grow for you; and you will eat the plants of the field ...”

*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Deuteronomy 28:20 NASB
The LORD will send upon you curses, confusion, and rebuke, in all you undertake to do, until you are
destroyed and until you perish quickly, on account of the evil of your deeds, because you have forsaken me.
2. “To treat as cursed” = Hebrew qalel (‫ )קלל‬means to treat someone with contempt, to treat them as one
who has been cursed.
Genesis 16:5 NASB*
And Sarai said to Abram, “May the wrong done me be upon you. I gave my maid into your arms, but when
she saw that she had conceived, I was treated as cursed/despised (‫ )קלל‬in her sight. May the LORD judge
between you and me.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Leviticus 19:14 NASB*
You shall not treat as cursed/despise (‫ )קלל‬one who is deaf, nor place a stumbling block before the blind,
but you shall revere your God; I am the LORD.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

2 Samuel 16:13 NASB*

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

127 of 208

So David and his men continued along the road while Shimei was going along the hillside opposite him,
treating him as cursed (‫ )קלל‬as he went and throwing stones at him and showering him with dirt.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

There are a few places where both words are used together, so the slight difference between them becomes
more clear: qalel means to treat someone like they are ’arar, which means to speak about or to act toward
them as if they are actually in a cursed state.
Genesis 12:2-3 NASB*
2

And I will make you a great nation,

and I will bless you,
and make your name great;
and so you shall be a blessing;
3

and I will bless those who bless you,

and the one who treats you as cursed (‫ )קלל‬I will curse (‫)ארר‬.
And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Exodus 22:28 NASB*
Do not treat God as cursed/with contempt (‫ )קלל‬or curse (‫ )ארר‬the ruler of your people.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

This gives us a helpful profile of the word qalel. It can refer to actions or words that treat someone as if they
were in a state of misfortune, disaster, and death. This gives more significance to God’s words in Genesis 8:21.

Noah’s Sacrifice and the Release of Divine Blessing
The literary design of Genesis 8:21-9:1 keys into important themes in the Genesis story.

The Outer Frames (Gen. 8:21, 9:1)
The outer frames of God’s speech match each other in blessing/curse vocabulary. The curse of the flood, a
divine judgment, is rescinded and the universal blessing is released. In this way, Noah is portrayed as an image
of the “seed of the woman” in Genesis 3:15 who undoes what the snake has done and so restores the Eden
blessing to all humanity.

The Inner Frames (Gen. 8:22)
The inner frame is a poetic statement about the order of creation established in Genesis 1:3-31. The flood was
the undoing of cosmic order as the boundary between Heaven and Earth collapsed in on itself. Here God
makes a promise (marked by a covenant sign in 9:8-17) that creation order will endure, specifically the annual,
seasonal, and daily rhythms that make human flourishing possible.

The Conclusion (Gen. 9:1)

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

128 of 208

God announces that even though the land is under a curse (’arar), that is, in a state of misfortune because of
human folly and violence (Gen. 3:17; 5:29), God is not going to treat the land and its people as under the
curse. In Genesis 3-6, humanity has polluted God’s good world with innocent blood, resulting in the cosmic
collapse of the flood. But instead of letting the land remain under that curse, God is going to give the gift of
cosmic stability instead. He will maintain cosmic order so that the seed of the woman can arrive and undo the
power of the curse.
“Salvation through the ark does not fulfill the meaning and destiny of Noah’s name (from Gen. 5:29). Rather,
Noah is saved in order to worship, to offer the sacrifice that causes God another ‘repenting’ (‫נחם‬, from 6:8),
that is, a ‘rest/comforting’ (‫ )ניחוח‬that turns curse into blessing. Noah’s priestly mediation is the means by
which relief from the toil of the curse ground became a reality. For God as well as for humanity, Noah is the
consolation for the fall of Adam.”
Morales, Michael (2012). The Tabernacle Pre-Figured: Cosmic Mountain Ideology in Genesis and Exodus.
Peeters Publishers. 186.
When Noah gets off the boat, his sacrifice marks him as the righteous and blameless intercessor who will
devote himself to God. God accepts his sacrifice, but he notes that humanity is no different now than before
the flood. This is ironic because Noah and his family are the only people around!
God’s view of the human condition is vindicated by the following narrative when Noah goes on to replay the
sin of Adam and Eve by eating the fruit of a garden, getting naked, and involving himself in a shameful act with
his son. This disqualifies Noah from being the fully-fledged seed of the woman of Genesis 3:15, but he does
advance the portrait of the the needed deliverer.
“The text clearly indicates that God’s heart changed towards mankind, though mankind’s heart itself had not
changed. Indeed, given that God’s heart has changed while the primary reason for the deluge (man’s heart)
has not, the deity, apart from an atoning sacrifice, would be open to the charge of capriciousness. The
reader would wonder: ‘Was the flood in vain?’ That is, did the deluge accomplish anything if the original
circumstance and conflict remains? Failing to connect God’s change of heart to the sacrifice, one is left with
the impression that God somehow matured through the experience of the flood ... All of these charges are
avoided when the change of heart is understood as wrought by Noah’s pleasing sacrifice ... Until God’s heart
is changed by the sacrifice—even after the deluge, there is no divine resolve toward forbearance and
blessing. The pivotal and efficacious sacrifice of Noah ... changes mankind’s position from cursed to
blessed.”
Adapted from Morales, Michael (2012). The Tabernacle Pre-Figured: Cosmic Mountain Ideology in Genesis
and Exodus. Peeters Publishers. 183-185.

Reflection Question
The reason God brought the flood—the evil purposes of the human heart—is now the reason God will never
again strike all life with a flood (Gen. 8:21). What significant act is different after the flood?

Class Notes: Noah to Abraham

129 of 208

