Session 7: Down Into the Pit

Key Takeaways
The biblical authors liken Yoseph’s descent into the pit to an animal sent to slaughter. Details like the
goat killed for its blood and Potiphar, captain of the butchers, give shape to this image.
Through repetition of key vocabulary, the biblical authors link Yoseph’s betrayal with the binding of
Isaac.
Human evil leads to the death of the beloved one, but God provides a takhat (a substitute, one who
stands in the place of another).

Paragraph 3: Genesis 37:31-36

31 And they took the robe of Yoseph,

and they slaughtered a hairy goat ,
and they dipped the robe in the blood,
32 and they sent the robe of many colors,

and they brought it to their father .

And they said,
“We found this!
Recognize it , please!
Is it the robe of your son , or not?”
33 And he recognized it ,

and he said,
“The robe of my son !
A terrible animal ate him!
Yoseph has certainly been torn apart!”

34 And Ya’akov tore his clothes,

and he placed sackcloth on his thighs,
and he grieved over his son for many days.
35 And all his sons and all his daughters got up to comfort him,

and he refused to be comforted,
and he said,

Class Notes: Joseph

37 of 215

“Surely, I will go down to my son , grieving , to She’ol!”
And his father wept for him ,
36 but as for the Medanim , they sold him to Egypt,

to Potiphar, official of Phar’oh,
captain of the butchers .

Genesis 37:31-36. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022).

The Deceptive Animal (Garment)
Adam and Eve are deceived by a spiritual being who takes up the animal disguise of a snake, and so they end
up clothed with the skin of an animal and exiled from Eden (Gen. 3).
Yaaqov put on the skin of a slaughtered goat in order to deceive his father and gain the blessing, only to find
himself exiled from Canaan (Gen. 27).
Yoseph loses his royal robe, his brothers smear it with the blood of a slaughtered goat to deceive their father,
and Yoseph finds himself exiled from Canaan (Gen. 37).

A Beloved Son and a Slaughtered Goat
Notice how the cloak, bloodied by a slaughtered goat, becomes a twisted image of Yoseph’s status as the
beloved son who was supposed to be elevated to a place of rule and honor among the brothers.
The capture and sale of Yoseph is replete with language from the Aqedah in Genesis 22, which is full of ironic
inversions and twists.

Yaaqov, Yoseph, and a Goat in Genesis 37

Avraham, Yitskhaq, and a Ram in Genesis 22

Gen. 37:3 Yoseph is Yaaqov’s “son of old age”

Gen. 21:2, 7; 22:2 Yitskhaq is Avraham’s “son of old

)‫(בן זקנים‬, whom he loves )‫ (אהב‬more than his

age” )‫(בן לזקניו‬, whom he loves )‫(אהב‬

brothers.

Gen. 37:13 Yaaqov calls for Yoseph, “and he said,

Gen. 22:1 God calls for Avraham, “and he said,

‘Here I am’ )‫”(הנני‬

‘Here I am’ )‫”(הנני‬
Gen. 22:7 Yitskhaq calls for Avraham, “and he said,
‘Here I am’ )‫”(הנני‬
Gen. 22:11 The Angel of Yahweh calls for Avraham,
“and he said, ‘Here I am’ )‫”(הנני‬

Rams and Goats in Genesis. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022).

Class Notes: Joseph

38 of 215

Yaaqov, Yoseph, and a Goat in Genesis 37

Avraham, Yitskhaq, and a Ram in Genesis 22

Gen. 37:18 “And they [the brothers] saw )‫(ראה‬

Gen. 22:4 “And Avraham saw )‫ (ראה‬the place

him [Yoseph] from afar )‫” (מרחק‬

from afar )‫” (מרחק‬

Gen. 37:20 “Let’s say an evil beast ate him )‫(אכל‬

Gen. 22:6 “And Avraham took )‫ … (לקח‬the

…”

knife/eater )‫” (מאכלת‬

Gen. 37:24-25 “And they took him )‫ … (לקח‬and
they sat down to eat )‫ (אכל‬bread …”

Gen. 37:22 Reuven to brothers: “Don’t send out a

Gen. 22:10 “And Avraham sent out his hand

hand against him )‫”(ויד אל תשלחו בו‬

)‫ (וישלח … את ידו‬and he took the knife …”

Gen. 37:27 Yehudah to brothers: “And our hand,

Gen. 22:12 Angel to Avraham: “Don’t send out

don’t let it be against him )‫”(וידני אל תהי בו‬

your hand against the lad )‫”(אל תשלח ידך אל הנער‬

Gen. 37:25 The brothers “lifted their eyes and

Gen. 22:4 “And Avraham lifted his eyes and

looked, and behold, Yishmaelites”

looked at the place from afar.”
Gen. 22:13 “And Avraham lifted his eyes and
looked, and behold, a ram afar, caught in the
thicket.”

Gen. 37:31-32 The brothers take a goat and slay it

Gen. 22:10, 13 Avraham is about to slay )‫ (שחט‬his

)‫ (שחט‬as a substitute for their brother, and bring

son, but is able to offer a ram “as a substitute for

its blood to their father.

his son”

Rams and Goats in Genesis. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022).

The affinities of the Yoseph story with the binding of Isaac in Genesis 22 are striking, though the relationship
is one of inversion in some important respects.
Abraham intends to slay Isaac, who is spared in the nick of time. // Yaaqov intends to send and receive
his son back soon but finds that he has been “slain.”
Abraham offers the sacrificial ram in place of his son. // For Yaaqov, the goat and its blood take the
place of the son, because he has (so Yaaqov thinks) been mauled to death. The slain goat symbolizes
the loss of the beloved son.
Abraham intends to lose his son and receives him back. // Yaaqov intends to receive back his son and
loses him.
But alongside these inversions, there are also profound continuities.

Class Notes: Joseph

39 of 215

For Yaaqov’s beloved son, his death is only symbolized; in reality he has been “spared” from literal
death. The goat dies and the son lives to be later restored to his father.
The son who undergoes symbolic death is the firstborn of his father’s preferred wife (just as Isaac is to
Sarah).
Yoseph’s words to Yaaqov “here I am” (Gen. 37:13) echo Abraham’s response to God (Gen. 22:1, 11), as
well as Esau’s response to Isaac in Genesis 27:1.
“In a sense, the two stories of Abraham and Isaac and that of Isaac and Jacob flow together in the story of
Jacob and Joseph.”
Levenson, Jon D. (1995). The Death and Resurrection of the Beloved Son. Yale University Press. 149.

Yoseph Assaulted, Slaughtered, Exiled, Enslaved, and Thrown in
the Grave
Genesis 37 creates a network of images and vocabulary to describe Yoseph’s fate, some of them real and
others imagined. But their association in this opening story connects them in an important way, and we find
them repeated and connected even more as the story develops.
Yoseph is thrown into a pit )‫( (בור‬Gen. 37:20, 22, 24, 28, 29).
Yoseph is abused by his brothers (Gen. 37:23).
Yoseph is substituted for a slaughtered animal (Gen. 37:31-32).
Yoseph is sold into slavery (Gen. 37:28-29).
Yaaqov assumes that Yoseph is “torn up,” “eaten,” and “in the grave” (Gen. 37:33, 35).
This network of associations provides the most robust portrait of human evil and violence that we’ve
encountered thus far in Genesis. These images will be drawn upon throughout the Hebrew Bible, especially to
describe David’s dangerous trials in the Psalms (Ps. 69).
Psalm 69:1-2, 4, 8-9, 14-15 Instructor's Translation
1

Save me, O God,

for the waters have threatened my life.
2

I have sunk in deep mire, and there is no foothold;

I have come into deep waters, and a flood overflows me. ...
4

Those who hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head;

those who would destroy me are powerful, being wrongfully my enemies;
what I did not steal, I then have to restore. ...
8

I have become estranged from my brothers,

and a foreigner to my mother’s sons.
9

For zeal for your house has consumed me,

and the reproaches of those who reproach you have fallen on me. ...
14

Deliver me from the mire and do not let me sink;

may I be delivered from my foes and from the deep waters.

Class Notes: Joseph

40 of 215

15

May the flood of water not overflow me,

nor the deep swallow me up,
nor the pit shut its mouth on me.

Reflection Question
How do the biblical authors subtly foreshadow the hopeful deliverance coming at the end of the Yoseph story
as the brothers cast Yoseph into the pit?

Class Notes: Joseph

41 of 215

