Session 11: Dreamers in Pharaoh’s Prison

Key Takeaways
The theme of dreams and visions in Genesis is foundational to later apocalyptic literature and
emphasizes the important role of dreams in the world of the biblical authors.
A three-day period often indicates that the theme of testing appears nearby in the narrative.
The Yoseph story contains many instances of paired or parallel events or repetitions. These doublings
often point to a single reality, and they invite readers to consider why this narrative is focused
specifically on two brothers, Yoseph and Yehudah.

Yoseph Interprets Dreams in Prison

1 And it came about after these things,

that they sinned, the cup-bearer of the king of Egypt and the baker ,
against their master, against the king of Egypt,
2 and Phar’oh was angry with his two officials,

against the captain of the cup-bearers ,
and against the captain of the bakers ,
3 and he gave them into the prison,

the house of the captain of the butchers,
into the round-house,
the place where Yoseph was imprisoned.

4 And the captain of the butchers appointed Yoseph with them,

and he served them,
and they were there for days in the prison.

5 And the two of them

dreamed a dream ,

each his dream in one night,
each according to the interpretation of his dream,
the cup-bearer and the baker of the king of Egypt ,
who were imprisoned there in the round-house.

6 And Yoseph went to them in the morning,

and he saw them, and look, they were distraught,

Class Notes: Joseph

70 of 215

7 and he asked the officials of Phar’oh,

who were with him in the prison of the house of his master, saying,
“Why are your faces bad today?”

8 And they said to him,

“We dreamed a dream ,
and there is no one to interpret it.”
And Yoseph said to them,
“Don’t interpretations belong to Elohim?
Please, recount it for me.”

Genesis 40:1-8. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022).

9 And the captain of the cup-bearers recounted his dream to Yoseph,

and he said to him,
“In my dream, look:
a vine was before me,
10 and on the vine were three

tendrils ,

and as it was blooming its blossom rose up,
its clusters ripened with grapes.
11 And the cup of Phar’oh was in my hand,

and I took the grapes,
and I crushed them into the cup of Phar’oh ,
and I gave the cup into the hand of Phar’oh .”

12 And Yoseph said to him,

“ This is its interpretation :
The three

tendrils are

13 Within three

days

three

days .

Phar’oh will lift up your head ,

and he will return you to your post,
and you will give the cup of Phar’oh into his hand,
according to the custom of the beginning, when you were his cup-bearer.

14 However, if you can remember me with you,

when the good thing happens for you,
and please act with loyal-love towards me,
and make remembrance of me to Phar’oh,
and bring me out from this house,
15 because I was stolen from the land of the Hebrews,

and even here I have done nothing,
that they should have put me in this pit."

Class Notes: Joseph

71 of 215

16 And the captain of the bakers saw that the interpretation was good, and he said to Yoseph,

“So then, as for me, in my dream, look:
Three

baskets of white-bread were upon my head,

17 and on the most-high basket were some from all of the food of Phar’oh,

the work of a baker,
and the birds ate them from the basket upon my head.”

18 And Yoseph answered and said,

“ This is its interpretation :
The three

baskets are

19 Within three

days

three

days .

Phar’oh will lift up your head from upon you,

and he will hang you upon a tree,
and the birds will eat your flesh from upon you.”

Genesis 40:9-19. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022)

20 And it came about on the third day,

it was the birthday of Phar’oh,
and he made a feast for all his servants ,

and he lifted up the head of the captain of the cup-bearers
and the head up off the captain of the bakers
in the midst of his servants .

21 And he returned the captain of the cup-bearers over his cup-work,

and he gave the cup into the palm of Phar’oh
22 and the captain of the bakers he hanged,

just as Yoseph had interpreted for them.

23 But the captain of the cup-bearers did not remember

Yoseph ,

and he forgot him.

Genesis 40:20-23. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022)

Two Dreams of “Exaltation”
As Yoseph sits in the lowest of low places (in a dungeon in Egypt), he hears the two dreams of other exalted
figures who have also been brought down low into the prison-pit. The similarity between Yoseph and these
two fellow prisoners invites the reader to compare the importance of these dreams. If these officials have two
dreams that result in a restoration of some kind, we begin to hope that Yoseph’s two dreams of exaltation
might also come true.

Class Notes: Joseph

72 of 215

Dreams of Bread and Wine
Notice how the two dreams of the officials are about coordinated images of provision and sustenance (bread
and wine). The coming famine will bring a scarcity of just these things, so this story points forward as well as
backward.

Reflection Question
What role do dreams play in Genesis and beyond in biblical literature?

Class Notes: Joseph

73 of 215

