Session 17: Reconciliation of the Brothers

Key Takeaways
Returning to the flood melody, Yoseph’s offer of refuge in Egypt echoes the safety of the ark during the
de-creation of the cosmos.
The name Goshen is a wordplay on the Hebrew word for “garden” (gan), representing an abundance of
God’s provision in the midst of famine.
God rescuing Yaaqov’s family from destruction is about a rebirth for all humanity.
Yehudah’s self-sacrifice reverses the pattern of sibling rivalry and conflict that runs through the entire
book of Genesis.

Section 3: Genesis 45:1-25a
A – Genesis 45:1-3
Yoseph Reveals Himself to His Brothers

• 45:2 “and he gave his voice in weeping )‫” (בכי‬
• 45:2 “ and Egypt heard, and it was heard in the house of Pharaoh ”
• 45:3 “and he said, ‘I am Yoseph, your brother!’”
• 45:3 “and they could not answer him, because they were stunned )‫” (בהל‬
B – Genesis 45:4-13
45:4-7

• 45:4 “I am Yoseph your brother!”
• 45:7 “ Elohim sent me here before you, to keep alive a remnant for you”
• 45:6 “ there are still five more years of the famine ”
45:8

• “Pharaoh has placed me as a father … and a master … and a ruler over all the land”
45:9-13

• 45:9 “ Elohim has placed me as a master for all of Egypt”

Class Notes: Joseph

121 of 215

• 45:11 “ there are still five more years of the famine ”

A' – 45:14-25a
Yoseph and the Brothers Embrace

• 45:14-15 “and he wept )‫(בכה‬, and he kissed his brothers, and wept )‫ (בכה‬over them”
• 45:16 “ And the voice was heard in the house of Pharaoh ”
• 45:24 “And he sent his brothers … and said to them, ‘Don’t disturb each other )‫ (רגז‬on the road!’”
Genesis 45:1-25. Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022).

In this section, Yoseph reveals himself to his brothers while also revealing his understanding of God’s plan in
all of these terrible events. Yoseph becomes an interpreter not just of dreams, but of his own life story. He
sees the providence of God turning the brothers’ evil into good.
Notice the symmetrical design of this section.
In the outer parts (Gen. 45:1-3 and 45:14-25a), Yoseph’s weeping is highlighted, as well as the loud
sound of crying that can be heard all throughout the royal palace. These outer sections also show the
brothers in a state of shock (‫נבהל‬, Gen. 45:3) and agitation (‫רגז‬, Gen. 45:24). These two words are often
used as synonyms for people in a state of shock, fear, and anger when they experience traumatic
events (see Exod. 15:14; Joel 2:1).
In the center part (Gen. 45:4-13), Yoseph twice warns his brothers about the five remaining years of
famine (these warnings form a literary frame around verse 8), and he tells them how Elohim turned the
brother’s treachery into a rescue by sending him to Egypt to become ruler of all.

Yoseph Reveals Himself to His Brothers

1 And Yoseph was not able to restrain himself for all those standing by him,

and he called out,
“Every man, go out from me!”
And no man stood with him when Yoseph made himself known to his brothers .

2 And he gave his voice in weeping,

and Egypt heard,
and the house of Phar’oh heard,

3 and Yoseph said to his brothers ,

“I am Yoseph!
Is my father alive?!”
And his brothers were not able to answer him,

Class Notes: Joseph

122 of 215

because they were stunned before him.

Genesis 45:1-3. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022)

Yoseph’s Speech of Self-Revealing

4 And Yoseph said to his brothers,

“Draw near to me, please!”
And they drew near.
And he said,
“I am Yoseph, your brother !
The one you sold to Egypt!
A 5 And now, don’t let your heart be grieved with pain,

and don’t let there be hot anger in your eyes,
because you sold me here,
because Elohim sent me before you all
B

for the preservation of life !

6 Because these two years of famine have been in the midst of the land,

and there are yet five years in which there is no plowing or harvest,

7 and Elohim sent me before you all

A'

to set up for you all a remnant in the land,
and to preserve you all alive ,
as a great escaped-remnant.

8 So now, you all did not send me here, but Elohim ,

and he has set me up as a father to Phar’oh ,
and as a master for all his house ,
and as one who rules over all the land of Egypt .

9 Hurry, and go up to my father,

and say to him,
‘Thus says Yoseph your son ,
“Elohim has set me up as master of all Egypt .
Come down to me.
Don’t just stand there!
a 10 And you will dwell in the land of

Goshen ,

b and you will be close to me,
c

you and your sons and the sons of your sons,
and your flocks and your cattle and everything that is yours.

a' 11 And I will support you

there ,

b' because there are five more years of famine ,
c' so that you are not dispossessed, you and your house and everything that is yours.”’
12 And look, your eyes are seeing ,

Class Notes: Joseph

123 of 215

and the eyes of my brother Binyamin ,
that it is my mouth that is speaking to you.
13 So you must tell my father of all my honor in Egypt,

and of everything that you’ve seen ,
and you must hurry and bring down my father to here.”

Genesis 45:4-13. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022)

Yoseph as an Image of Elohim and a New Noah
When Yoseph reveals himself to his brothers, his speech is packed with verbal links back to the portraits of
the image of God from Genesis 1:26-28 and to the story of Noah in Genesis 6-8.

Yoseph as the Image of Elohim

Humanity in Genesis 1-2

Yoseph in Genesis 45

Elohim created human as a divine image to

Elohim appointed Yoseph as a father and master of

rule )‫רדה‬, Gen. 1:26) over the land and its

Egypt who will rule )‫משל‬, Gen. 45:8) over all the land of

animals, as a mirror of the heavenly lights

Egypt, and so the brothers are to tell their father to “go

who were appointed to rule )‫משל‬, Gen. 1:14-

down” to Yoseph (‫רדה‬, ‫ירד‬, Gen. 45:9) and to tell him of

16) over the day and night.

all the “honor/glory” )‫כבוד‬, Gen. 45:13).

Yahweh Elohim elevated human from the

Elohim has elevated Yoseph from sale to slavery (Gen.

dust of the land outside of Eden and “gave

45:4) outside their homeland, up to a place of rule, in

him rest” )‫נוח‬, Gen. 2:15) in the garden to

order to preserve life )‫למחיה‬, Gen. 45:5).

offer access to unending life )‫חי לעלם‬,
Gen. 2:9; 3:22).

Humanity in the Beginning and Joseph at the End. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Joseph (2022).

Recall that Yoseph’s dreams were about his future rule over his family and over “the sun, moon, and stars” (the
only other time that phrase occurs in Genesis aside from Gen. 1:14-16). And so Yoseph is depicted as “ruling”

)‫ (משל‬with the same verb used of the rule of the heavenly lights in Genesis 1!
After the suffering of Yahweh’s chosen one, they are elevated to a place of honor and rule over the nations, in
order to provide life for all!

Yoseph as a New Noah

Class Notes: Joseph

124 of 215

Noah in Genesis 6-9

Yoseph in Genesis 45

Elohim warns Noah of the coming flood: “After

“For these two years a famine (i.e., not enough

seven more days )‫ (לימים עוד שבעה‬I will bring rain

water) has been in the land, and there are still

upon the land” (Gen. 7:4)

five more years )‫ (ועוד חמש שנים‬of no harvesting
or reaping” (Gen. 45:6)

“You will take animals … to keep alive )‫ (לחיות‬seed

“Elohim sent me before you, to set up for you a

on the land on the face of the land … (Gen 7:3)” +

remnant )‫ (שארית‬in the land, and to keep alive

“Elohim wiped away every living thing from the face

)‫ (להחיות‬a great escaped-remnant )‫( ”(פליטה‬Gen.

of the land, but Noah and those with him were a

45:7)

remnant )‫ (שאר‬in the ark” (Gen. 7:23)

Elohim instructs Noah about how to provide food

Yoseph instructs his brothers to get their father,

for himself, his family (“you, your sons, your wife,

so that he can provide them with food (“for you,

and your sons wives … and all the animals”), and the

your sons, and your sons’ sons, and your flocks

animals during the flood (Gen. 6:21)

and your cattle, and I will sustain you there”)
during the famine (Gen. 45:10)

The Flood Narrative in the Joseph Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022).

Yoseph’s speech to his brothers shows how he is being portrayed as a new Noah, a righteous one that Elohim
has chosen for preserving a remnant in the land, so that a new creation (human and animal!) can be birthed in
a time of cosmic re-creation (the famine // the flood).
Notice the focus on the preservation of both human and animal life in both stories.
Also notice that this whole scene takes place in the Pharaoh’s “house” )‫(הבית‬, which is the word “ark” spelled
backward )‫!(תבה‬

Yoseph Sends His Brother Back to Yaaqov

14 And he fell upon the neck of Binyamin his brother and he wept,

and Binyamin wept upon his neck.
15 And he kissed all of his brothers ,

and he wept over them,
and afterward his brothers spoke with him.

16 And the voice was heard in the house of Phar'oh, saying,

“The brothers of Yoseph have come!”
And it was good in the eyes of Phar’oh,

Class Notes: Joseph

125 of 215

and in the eyes of his servants,

17 and Phar’oh said to Yoseph,

“Say to your brothers ,
‘ Do this :
a Load your beasts,

and leave, go to the land of Cana’an,
b

18 and take

your father and your households,

and come to me,
c

and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt,
and eat the fat of the land!

19 And you are being commanded.

Do this :
a'

Take for yourselves from the land of Egypt carts ,
for your children and for your wives,
b'

and you will carry your father ,
and you will come.
c'

20 And your eyes , don’t let them pity your belongings,

because the good of all the land of Egypt, it is for you!’”

21 And the sons of Yisra’el did so.

And Yoseph gave them carts according to the mouth of Phar’oh,
and he gave them fodder for the road .
22 And to all of them he gave to each a change of clothes,

and to Binyamin he gave three hundred silver and five changes of clothes,
23 and to his father he sent like this:

Ten donkeys carrying from the good of the land of Egypt,
and ten female donkeys carrying grain,
and bread and provisions for his father for the road .
24 And he sent his brothers and they went,

and he said to them,
“Don’t let yourselves get angry on the road .”
25a And so they went up out of Egypt.

Genesis 45:14-25. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Joseph (2022)

Brothers Dwelling Together in Unity
Yoseph’s reconciliation with his brothers is portrayed with language that deliberately recalls the reconciliation
of his father Yaaqov with his estranged brother Esau.

Class Notes: Joseph

126 of 215

Yoseph and His Brothers: Genesis 45:14-15

Yaaqov and Esau: Genesis 33:3-4

And he fell upon the neck of Binyamin his brother

… and he came near to his brother.
Then Esau ran to meet him,

and he wept ,
and Binyamin wept

upon his neck ,

and he kissed all of his brothers,
and he wept over them.

and he embraced him,
and he fell on his neck and kissed him,
and they wept .

Jacob and Esau Reflected in Joseph and His Brothers. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Joseph (2022).

After Yaaqov’s 20-year exile, caused by his deception of his father and brother, the brothers finally meet.
Yaaqov discovers mercy, and there is a powerful embrace that brings the two brothers together.
Similarly, after Yoseph’s 13-year exile, caused by his brothers’ jealousy and after the deception of their father,
the brothers finally meet and Yoseph shows them mercy.
However, Yoseph’s reconciliation with his brothers isn’t just a parallel with the Yaaqov and Esau story. Both
stories of reconciled siblings bring to a climax the “conflict of seeds” and “sibling rivalry” themes in the book
of Genesis.
Round 1: Humanity vs. the snake
Round 2: Abel vs. Cain
Round 3: Shem and Japheth vs. Ham
Round 4: Abraham vs. Lot
Round 5: Isaac vs. Ishmael
Round 6: Yaaqov vs. Esau
Round 7: Yoseph vs. his brothers
“Each of these sibling rivalries or ‘seed conflicts’ develops the paradigmatic conflict first announced in
Genesis 3:15 and then portrayed in Cain’s murder of Abel. While only Genesis 4 ends in murder, the threat
of fratricide against the covenant seed looms throughout each of these conflicts. The seed conflict
between Joseph and his brothers is, thus, climactic in Genesis, as the brothers’ intense animosity for
Joseph evokes … Genesis 4. … The dramatic twist in the Joseph story is that Joseph’s wise plan to ‘test’ his
brothers (42:15-16), coupled with Judah’s repentance (44:18-34), lead to a reversal of the Cain and Abel
story. … The unresolved brotherly strife of previous generations is finally overcome by Yoseph’s ruse in
chapters 42-45, and by his refusal to exact vengeance on his brothers after Jacob’s death (50:15-21). In this
way, the Joseph story reverses one of the primary literary motifs in Genesis. Sibling conflict has racked the
covenant family and endangered the seed since Adam and Eve’s first children. Joseph undoes the cycle of
violence, but only by exercising forgiveness after his own humiliation and exaltation. In this way, Joseph is
an anti-Cain. He is truly his brothers’ keeper.”
Emadi, Samuel (2018). “Covenant,Typology, and the Story of Joseph”. Tyndale Bulletin. 100-101.

The Ark-Eden of Egypt
Class Notes: Joseph

127 of 215

Recall how the above paragraph of Yoseph’s speech (Gen. 45:4-13) portrayed him as a new Noah-like remnant
who was chosen out of the generation of the famine to preserve life for a remnant that would survive through
the de-creation. Here in this paragraph, that analogy continues.
Pharaoh begins commanding Yoseph and the brothers to “go” )‫ (בוא‬back to their land and to “take” )‫ (לקח‬their
father and animals and “come into” )‫ (בוא אל‬Egypt, where they can have food )‫ (אכל‬and enjoy the good of the
land. All of this language is a hyperlink back to God’s speech to Noah before the flood.

Pharaoh to Yoseph and the Brothers:
Genesis 45

17

God to Noah: Genesis 6-7

... “Say to your brothers,

Gen. 6:20 “Of the birds after their kind, and of the animals

‘Do this:

after their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground after its

Load your animals ,

kind, two of every kind will come to )‫ (בוא אל‬you to keep

and leave, go to )‫ (בוא אל‬the land of

them alive.”

Canaan,
18

and take )‫ (לקח‬your father and your

households,
and come to )‫ (בוא אל‬me,
and I will give you the good of the

Gen. 7:1 Then the Lord said to Noah, “ Enter )‫ אל‬... ‫ (בוא‬the
ark, you and all your household, for you alone I have seen to
be righteous before me in this time.”

land of Egypt,
and eat )‫ (אכל‬the fat of the land!
19

And you are being commanded

)‫(צוה‬.

Gen. 6:21–22 “As for you, take )‫ (לקח‬for yourself some of all
food that can be eaten (‫)אכל‬, and gather it to yourself; and it
shall be for food (‫ )אכלה‬for you and for them.”

Do this:
Take )‫ (לקח‬carts from the land of
Egypt,

Gen. 7:2 “You will take (‫ )לקח‬with you of every clean animal

for your children and for your wives,

by sevens, a male and his female; and of the animals that

and you will carry your father,

are not clean two, a male and his female.”

and you will come )‫(בוא‬.
20

And don’t let your eyes pity your

belongings,
because the good of all the land of

Gen. 6:22 And so Noah did )‫ ;(עשה‬according to all that God
had commanded )‫ (צוה‬him, so he did )‫(כן עשה‬.

Egypt,
it is for you!’”
21

And the sons of Yisrael did so

)‫(עשה כן‬.

Gen. 7:5 Noah did )‫ (עשה‬according to all that the Lord had
commanded )‫ (צוה‬him.

Pharaoh Speaking to Joseph Like God Speaking to Noah. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject
Classroom: Joseph (2022).

These verbal hyperlinks set up a network of analogies between the story of Noah and the flood and the story
of Yoseph and the famine.
Pharaoh // Elohim give commands to Yoseph and his brothers // Noah and his family.

Class Notes: Joseph

128 of 215

A de-creation event comes upon the land, taking away life.
God chooses one righteous leader (Yoseph // Noah) to create a place of refuge (the “good” of Egypt //
the ark) where their family can be delivered.
The chosen ones take many animals into the refuge where they can live. Notice that the word “carts” (

‫ )עגלות‬is literally the Hebrew word “calves” (‫)עגל‬, referring to a cart drawn by oxen.
The chosen ones obey the commands.

Reflection Question
What are some of the ways that the biblical authors link the rescue of Yaaqov’s family in Egypt to the rescue of
Noah’s family in the ark?

Class Notes: Joseph

129 of 215

Module 5: Joseph Rescues
Egypt and His Family
SESSIONS 18-20
God provides safety and life for Jacob's family while a flood of famine unmakes the
land. See Joseph as a new Noah saving the remnant of God’s people.

Class Notes: Joseph

130 of 215

