Session 4: Becoming Moses

Key Takeaways
Moses’ naming foreshadows his role as deliverer, but it also embraces the ambiguity of his identity.
When God identifies himself, he also solidifies Moses’ identity.

Naming Moses
Moses’ name presents readers with several interpretive possibilities. In Hebrew, Moses means “one who draws
out.” This speaks of both his deliverance by the hand of Pharaoh’s daughter and his role as God’s chosen
deliverer. However, in Egyptian, Moses means “son of ...” potentially drawing attention to ambiguity
surrounding Moses’ identity.

Who Is Moses?
The beginning chapters of Exodus wrestle with questions about Moses’ identity. How is he identified in the
first two chapters? How does Moses’ commissioning clarify his identity? Ultimately, God speaks the words
that settle the questions about Moses’ identity. “I am the God of your father, God of Abraham, God of Isaac,
and God of Jacob” (Exod. 3:6).

Moses and the Betrothal Scene Pattern
“M. expands on the five-element betrothal type-scene identified by Robert Alter in the OT. He identifies
seven additional typical elements that help constitute a larger betrothal journey narrative in which the
betrothal type-scene is situated. The full pattern comprises the following elements: (1) a groom-to-be
travels to a foreign land; (2) he meets (a) young woman/women at a well; (3) someone draws water; (4) the
suitor gives a gift or performs an ingratiating service; (5) the suitor reveals his identity; (6) someone rushes
with news of his arrival to the woman's family; (7) the family responds with a greeting/invitation; (8) a
betrothal is arranged; (9) the suitor resides with the woman's family; (10) the suitor returns home; (11) he is
received by his kin at journey's end; and (12) the suitor resides with his kin. Next, M. shows how the pattern
is creatively adapted in various stories in OT, Intertestamental, and NT literature, including narratives about
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Ruth, Saul, David, the entire story of Tobit, and the encounter of Jesus and the
Samaritan woman in the Fourth Gospel. Interpretation of these narratives is informed by recognition not
only of their conformity to the pattern but also their innovative use of it.”
Abstracted by: William J. Urbrock for Old Testament Abstracts

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

12 of 80

For further discussion of this topic, see Martin, Michael W. (2008). “Betrothal Journey Narratives.” Catholic
Biblical Quarterly 70. 505-23.

Moses’ Hybrid Identity
For further discussion of Moses’ hybrid identity, see Mbuvi, Amanda. “Multicultural Moses: Reexamining and
Icon.” Biblical Archaeology Review Volume 45, (no. 4-5). 16-18.

Reflection Question
How does Moses’ commissioning clarify his identity?

Class Notes: Exodus Overview

13 of 80

