Session 9: Out of Egypt

Key Takeaways
Matthew casts the story of Jesus’ birth as a retelling of the birth of Moses and the exodus.
Just as Moses was adopted into the house of Pharaoh, so Jesus was adopted into the house of David.
God’s pattern of choosing Abraham, Israel, and David challenges our cultural practices of privileging
only ourselves and those like us. God chooses one to bring blessing to the many.

Matthew 2:13-23

13 And after they departed,

look, a messenger of the Lord
A

shone-in-appearance to Ioseph in a dream , saying,

“Getting up, take the child and his mother,
and flee to Egypt and be there until whenever I speak to you!
For Herodes is about to seek

B

the child , to destroy him.”

14 And getting up, he took the child and his mother by night,

and he departed

to Egypt ,

15 and he was there until the death-end of Herodes ,

C

in order to fill-full what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
“ From Egypt I called my son .”

16 Then (τοτε) Herodes , seeing that he had been deceptively-tricked by the magi ,

he was enraged, very much,
and having sent, he did away with all the children ,
who were in Bethle’em and in all its districts,
from two years old and below,
according to the time which he learned precisely from the magi .

17 Then (τοτε) was filled-full what was spoken through Ieremias the prophet, saying,
18 “A voice was heard in Rama,

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

62 of 109

crying and great grieving;
Rakhel crying for her children ,
and she does not want to be comforted,
because they are no more.”

19 And after Herodes came to his death-end,

look a messenger of the Lord
A'

shone-in-appearance to Ioseph in Egypt

in a dream , saying,

20 “Getting up, take the child and his mother,

and go to the land of Israel ,
for those who seek the life of the child have died.

B'

21 And getting up, he took the child and his mother,

and he went to the land of Israel ,

22 and having heard that Arkhelaos ruled as king of Ioudaia,

in the place of his father Herodes ,
he was afraid and he left there,
and having been warned in a dream ,

C'

he departed into the region of Galilaia,
23 and having come, he lived in a city called “Nazaret,”

in order to fill-full what was spoken through the prophets,
that he would be called a Nazoraios.”

Matthew 2:13-23. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Rise of the
Messiah (2024)
This final panel of Matthew 1:18-2:23 has a very clear three-part symmetrical design.
A — Angel appears, directing Jopseh to take Mary and child to Egypt, they do so
B — Herod’s response (τοτε) + Scripture fulfillment (τοτε)
A’ — Angel appears, directing Joseph to take Mary and child to Israel, they do so
Notice the flight to Egypt and the return to Israel are coordinated so that, in a great reversal, Egypt becomes
the place of refuge while Israel is the land of death and danger.
This design also coordinates the father-son pair of Herod the Great and Herod-Archelaos.

An Inverted Exodus and a New Pharaoh
This entire sequence is designed as an inverted Exodus story. The classic characters and scenes have all been
changed so that the characters of Matthew’s story have surprising correspondences with the Exodus story.

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

63 of 109

Jesus and Joseph // Moses
Herod and Herod-Archelaos // Pharaoh
Israel // Egypt
Galilee // Midian

Matthew 2:13-14

Exodus 2:14b-15

13

14b

“Getting up, take the child and his mother,

And Moshe was afraid, and said,

and flee to Egypt and be there

“Surely, the matter has become known!”

until whenever I speak to you!

15

For Herodes is about to seek the child,

and he sought to murder Moshe,

to destroy him.”

and Moshe fled from before the face of Pharaoh,

14

And getting up,

he took the child and his mother by night,
and he departed to Egypt .

and he dwelt in the land of Midyan,
and he dwelt by a well.
Exodus 4:19-20
19

Matthew 2:19-20
19

And after Herodes came to his death-end,

look a messenger of the Lord shone-inappearance to Ioseph in Egypt in a dream, saying,
20

“Getting up, take the child and his mother,

and go to the land of Israel,

And Pharaoh heard of this matter,

And Yahweh said to Moshe in Midyan,

“Go, return to Egypt,
because the men seeking your life have died.”
20

And Moshe took his wife and his sons,

and he had them ride on a donkey,
and he returned to the land of Egypt,

for those who seek the life of the child have
died. “

Matthew 2:21-23
21

And getting up, he took the child and his

mother,
and he went to the land of Israel,
22

and having heard that Archelaos ruled as king

of Ioudaia,
in the place of his father Herodes,
he was afraid and he left there,
and having been warned in a dream,
he departed into the region of Galilaia,
23

and having come, he dwelt in a city called

“Nazeret”

Inverted Exodus and New Pharaoh. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Rise of the Messiah
(2024).

This portrait of Herod as a new Pharaoh is also programmatic for Matthew’s account as a whole, because
Herod represents the Jerusalem regime set on “destroying” (απολλυμι) the Messiah. Matthew will later portray
Jesus’ opponents with similar language, linking them all back to Herod and thus to Pharaoh.

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

64 of 109

Matthew 2:13 NASB
“Get up! Take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and remain there until I tell you; for Herod is going
to search for the child to destroy (απολλυμι) him.”
Matthew 12:14 NASB
But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him, as to how they might destroy (απολλυμι) him.
Matthew 27:20 NASB*
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to destroy (απολλυμι)
Jesus.
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

“Out of Egypt I Called My Son”
In Matthew 2:15, we find the third quotation from the Scriptures, a line from Hosea 11:1 where the prophet
recalls Israel’s exodus from Egypt in the past. In context, Hosea (in the 8th century B.C.E.) laments Israel’s
current state of idolatry and covenant violation, and he warns that they will return to captivity. This is tragic
because Israel as a nation is Yahweh’s son who was liberated from Egypt and is now headed toward captivity
and slavery again. But this “return” to slavery won’t be to Egypt but to Assyria.
Hosea 11:1-5 LEB
1

When Israel was a child, I loved him,

and out of Egypt I called my son.
2

When I called them, they went from my face.

They sacrificed to the Baals, and they sacrificed to idols.
3

And I myself taught Ephraim to walk;

I took them in my arms,
but they did not know that I healed them.
4

I drew them with human ties,

with the bands of love.
I was to them like one who lifted up a yoke on their jaws,
though I bent down to them and let them eat.
5

He will return to the land of Egypt,

and Assyria will be his king,
because they refused to return.
Matthew most likely adopts this line from Hosea not only because of the recall of the exodus from Egypt, but
also because of the designation of Israel as God’s son. Also, Hosea shows that the Egyptian slavery of the past
has become a symbol of the coming Assyrian enslavement.
This text from Hosea is also hyperlinked to an important text in the Exodus story itself, where Moses’ own
deliverance from the Egyptian Pharaoh through the waters (Exod. 1-4) is designed as a narrative
foreshadowing of all Israel’s deliverance through the waters (Exod. 5-15).

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

65 of 109

Exodus 4:22-23 LEB
22

And you must say to Pharaoh, “Thus says Yahweh, ‘Israel is my son, my firstborn.‘

23

And I said to you, ‘Release my son and let him serve me,‘ but you refused to release him. Look, I am

about to kill your son, your firstborn.”
Another relevant set of hyperlinks for Matthew’s quotation of Hosea 11:1 consists of passages that anticipate a
future king from the lineage of David, who will undergo an “exodus” that is set on analogy to Israel’s exodus
from Egypt.
Numbers 24:5-8 LEB
5

How good are your tents, O Jacob,

your dwellings, O Israel!
6

They are spread out like valleys,

like gardens on a river,
like aloes planted by Yahweh,
like cedars at the waters.
7

He will pour water from his buckets,

and his offspring will be like many waters;
his king will be higher than Agag,
and his kingdom will be exalted.
8

God, who brings him out from Egypt,

is like the strength of a wild ox for him.
Psalm 2:7-8 LEB
7

I will tell the decree; Yahweh said to me:

“You are my son;
today I have birthed you.
8

Ask from me and I will make the nations your heritage,

and your possession the ends of the earth.
It's useful to reconstruct the network of allusions to help us see how Matthew’s mind worked and how he saw
various parts of the Hebrew Bible as interconnected.
Matthew 2:15 quotes Hosea 11:1, which is hyperlinked to Exodus 4:26, which is portrayed by Numbers 24:5-6
as a narrative analogy between Moses’ exodus (Exod. 1-4), Israel’s exodus (Exod. 5-15), and the deliverance of
the future divine son of David (Ps. 2, 18).

“Rachel Weeping for Her Children”
Matthew’s fourth Old Testament quotation in the introduction comes from Jeremiah 31:15, where the prophet
portrays the matriarch of Israel grieving for the downfall and destruction of her children. Matthew connects
this quotation with the death of the children of Bethlehem who were ruthlessly murdered by King Herod.
As in the previous Old Testament quote, Matthew quotes this text because it has hyperlinked associations
with many other stories in the Hebrew Bible that provide meaningful narrative analogies with the story of

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

66 of 109

Jesus and Herod.
In context, Jeremiah portrays Rachel’s weeping as a sign of Israel’s devastation that will soon come to an end.
Jeremiah 31:15-16 LEB
15

Thus says Yahweh,

“A voice is heard in Ramah,
lamentation, the weeping of bitterness.
Rachel is weeping for her children;
she refuses to be comforted because of her children,
for they are no more.”
16

Thus says Yahweh:

“Restrain your voice from weeping,
and your eyes from tears,
for there is a reward for your work,” declares Yahweh,
“and they will return from the land of the enemy.”
In context, Jeremiah is appealing to the story of Rachel weeping for her lost sons and refusing to be
comforted. This recalls two moments in Genesis that provide the language for Jeremiah 31:15-16.
Genesis 30:22-24 NASB
22

Then God remembered Rachel, and God gave heed to her and opened her womb.

and bore a son and said, “God has taken away my reproach.”

24

23

So she conceived

She named him Joseph, saying, “May the

LORD give me another son.”
Genesis 35:16-19 NASB
16

Then they journeyed from Bethel; and when there was still some distance to go to Ephrath, Rachel

began to give birth and she suffered severe labor.
her, “Do not fear, for now you have another son.”

18

17

When she was in severe labor the midwife said to

It came about as her soul was departing (for she died),

that she named him Ben-oni; but his father called him Benjamin.

19

So Rachel died and was buried on the

way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem).
Genesis 37:33-35 NASB
33

Then he examined it and said, “It is my son’s tunic. A wild beast has devoured him; Joseph has surely

been torn to pieces!”
many days.

35

34

So Jacob tore his clothes, and put sackcloth on his loins and mourned for his son

Then all his sons and all his daughters arose to comfort him, but he refused to be

comforted. And he said, “Surely I will go down to Sheol in mourning for my son.” So his father wept for
him.
Genesis 42:13 Instructor's Translation
But they said, “Your servants are twelve brothers in all, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and
behold, the youngest is with our father today, and one is no more.”

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

67 of 109

Genesis 42:31-32 NASB
31

“But we said to him, ‘We are honest men; we are not spies.

32

We are twelve brothers, sons of our father;

one is no more, and the youngest is with our father today in the land of Canaan.’”
Genesis 44:20 NASB
“We said to my lord, ‘We have an old father and a little child of his old age. Now his brother is no more, so
he alone is left of his mother, and his father loves him.’”
In this network of texts, we have a number of narrative analogies working together.
Rachel, the mother of Joseph, was Jacob’s “beloved” wife who died an untimely death.
As she gave birth to Benjamin, she grieved and died, and she was buried near Bethlehem.
When Joseph was betrayed by his brothers and presumed dead, Jacob refused to be comforted and
wept.
Three times Joseph is said to be “no more.”
The final time this phrase appears, we are told that Benjamin is the only son of left from Rachel, and he
is especially beloved.
This network of texts in Genesis explores just how tragic Israel’s fate has become among the nations. Brother
betraying brother, tragic deaths and murders, all the sad result of humanity choosing to define good and bad
by their own wisdom. And it leads Jacob’s family into exile … in Egypt!
Jeremiah 31 brings together these themes and sees Rachel (buried near Bethlehem, birthplace of David and
Jesus) weeping like Jacob over her lost children. In Jeremiah’s context, this applies to the lost generations of
the Babylonian exile and destruction of Jerusalem. But the fact that Jeremiah adopts the image of Rachel and
portrays her in the mourning role of Jacob from the Joseph story shows that the prophet wants us to see how
these stories of the past prefigure the large-scale tragedies of Israel’s story in the future. The tragedy of
Babylonian exile was yet another cycle of betrayal and death in Israel’s story, so that the matriarch now weeps
from the grave over her children.
Matthew adopts the lines from Jeremiah 31:15 with full awareness of its hyperlinked nature, as he too is
exploring an act of betrayal (Israel’s king murdering his people’s children) that led to another exile in Egypt
(the Messiah’s). The analogy between these Old Testament stories (Rachel, Jacob, Joseph, and Jeremiah) and
the story of Herod and Jesus runs deep. These stories illuminate each other and point forward to a hopeful
resolution.

“He Will Be Called a Nazoraios”
After returning from Egypt, Joseph leads his new family to Nazareth in Galilee. Archaeologists estimate that
the town had a population of 500.
In this geographical move, Matthew sees another connection to the story of the Scriptures. This is the only
quotation that he attributes to “the prophets” as a group. This makes sense, because there is nowhere in the
Hebrew or Greek Bible that contains the line: “He will be called a Nazoraios.” Also, Matthew has adapted the
quotation formula by adding the conjunction “that” (οτι) before the phrase, showing that “he would be called
a Nazoraios” is not a quotation proper, but a reference to an idea or theme found in the Prophets.

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

68 of 109

It is most likely that Matthew has provided a riddle for the reader that leads to multiple hyperlinks in the
Hebrew Bible, but all roads lead back to Isaiah 4:2-3 and 11:1-2.
Isaiah 4:2-3 Instructor's Translation
2

In that day,

the sprout of YHWH will be
for beauty and for honor,
and the fruit of the land will be
for pride and for beauty
for the escaped-remnant of Yisrael.
3

And the one remaining in Zion,

and the one left-over in Yerushalayim,
he will be called a holy one,
everyone who is written for life in Yerushalayim.
Isaiah 11:1 NASB
Then a shoot will spring from the stem of Jesse,
and a branch (Heb. netser / ‫ )נצר‬from his roots will bear fruit.
These two texts are deeply connected in the design of Isaiah 1-12 because both portray the growth of a
messianic plant connected with a faithful remnant in Jerusalem that will become the seed of a renewed Israel
who will spread the Eden blessing to the nations.
1. Meaning #1: “branch/shoot” rhymes in Hebrew with the name of the town “Nazeret.”
The word shoot in Isaiah 11:1 is netser in Hebrew (likely pronounced natsr in the 1st century). This
provides an almost exact wordplay: The netser / ‫ נצר‬is from natseret / ‫!נצרת‬
2. Meaning #2: “he will be called a holy one” = “he will be called a Nazirite!”
In the Old Greek Septuagint, we find a curious feature: When the figure of the “Nazirite” (Heb.
nazir / ‫“ = נזיר‬a set-apart one”) appears, the translators sometimes simply transliterate it with the
word “Naziraion” (Grk. ναζιραιος, see Judg. 13:7, 16:17), but other times they interpret the word
instead and so render the word as “the holy one of God” (αγιος θεου, see Codex A and B for
Judg. 13:7 and 16:17).
This is significant because Jesus himself is called “the holy one of God” multiple times in the New
Testament (Mark 1:24, Luke 4:34, John 6:69). In other words, Jesus was viewed as a type of
Nazirite by the earliest Christians.
While Jesus was no ascetic (he regulary drank wine), he did at his final Passover vow to
never drink again until the Kingdom of God has arrived (Matt. 26:29), and he refused winevinegar during his crucifixion (Matt. 27:48).

Reflection Question
What parallels does Matthew draw between Jesus’ story and Moses or the exodus?

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

69 of 109

