Session 2: The Formation of the Gospels

Key Takeaways
The Gospels are carefully designed theological biographies of Jesus that focus on his announcement of
the good news about the arrival of God’s Kingdom here on Earth.
The gospel accounts are not merely historical records; they are designed to advance a claim that will
challenge the reader’s thinking, loyalties, and behavior.
The four gospel accounts offer different perspectives and carry different emphases. But from the
beginning of the Jesus movement, these differences have been celebrated as providing a fuller portrait
of the good news about Jesus through their unity and diversity.

What Are the Gospels?
They are carefully designed theological biographies of Jesus that focus on his announcement of the good
news about the arrival of God’s Kingdom here on Earth. The gospel accounts are not merely historical records
but are designed to advance a claim that will challenge the reader’s thinking, loyalties, and behavior: The
crucified and risen Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of David, that is, the Messiah of Israel, and the Son of God,
that is, the divine Lord of the world. The gospel narratives (1) claim to faithfully represent the story of Jesus
and (2) aim to persuade the reader to acknowledge Jesus as Lord and enter a community of his apprentices.
The titles of the four works tell us much about their purpose: “The Gospel according to _______.” This tells us
that Jesus’ story is being framed in a unique way by each author for distinct purposes. We have evidence that
these titles were being used in the early 2nd century C.E. to distinguish the gospel manuscripts from each
other.
For more on titles of the gospels in early New Testament manuscripts, see James Kelhoffer, "How Soon
a Book Revisited: ΕΥΑΓΓΕΛΙΟΝ as a Reference to Gospel Materials in the First Half of the Second
Century," in Zeitschrift fur Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft vol. 95 (2004), p. 1-34.
Calling these books "the Gospels” derives from Mark’s usage of the word in Mark 1:1 “The beginning of the
good news about Jesus the Messiah, the Son of God.”

The Gospel and Ancient Biography
The Gospels are a kind of ancient biography.
See the work of Richard Burridge, What Are the Gospels? A Comparison with Greco-Roman Biography,
and Loveday Alexander, The Preface to Luke’s Gospel.
Biographies in the ancient world were:

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

9 of 109

Representations of the essence/meaning of a key figure's life story and message
Not archival, unbiased accounts but accounts aimed at persuading the reader to emulate the figure
“The four apostolic Gospels are theological, historical, and formational, narrative biographies that retell the
story and proclaim the significance of Jesus as Israel’s messiah and the Lord of all nations, the one who
through the power of the Spirit is restoring God’s reign over all creation.”
Pennington, Jonathan (2012). Reading the Gospels Wisely. Baker Academic. 35.

The Formation of the Gospels

The Formation of the Gospels. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Rise of the Messiah (2024).

For more detail on each stage of this important process, see the work of:
Michael Bird, The Gospel of the Lord: How the Early Church Wrote the Story of Jesus
James D.G. Dunn, The Oral Gospel Tradition
Martin Hengel, The Four Gospels and the One Gospel of Jesus Christ

Main Theories of the Relationship Between the Synoptic Gospels
Charts adapted from Mark Goodacre, The Synoptic Problem: A Way Through the Maze

Priority of Mark Theories

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

10 of 109

The Two Source Theory. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Rise of the Messiah (2024).

The Two-Source Theory (Mark + “Q” + Special Matthew/Luke)

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

11 of 109

The Farrer Theory. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Rise of the Messiah (2024).

The Farrer Theory (Mark + Matthew used by Luke)

Priority of Matthew Theory

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

12 of 109

The Griesbach Theory. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Rise of the Messiah (2024).

The Griesbach Theory (Matthew was the source of Luke, both abbreviated by Mark)

Reflection Question
What is challenging for you about the differences in the four gospel accounts? What is encouraging or
helpful?

Class Notes: Rise of the Messiah

13 of 109

