Session 27: The Deaths of Rachel and Isaac

Key Takeaways
Rakhel’s difficult labor recalls both the promise of a victorious seed and the dire consequences for the
woman in Genesis 3:15-16.
Reuben’s sexual assault against Bilhah is another instance in a pattern of illicit sex used in a grab for
power.
The four burials in Genesis 35 each recall moments of deception in Yaaqov’s story.

Rakhel and Yitskhaq Die, Reuben’s Treachery

16 And they journeyed on from Beth-El,

and it happened, while they were still a stretch of land from the entrance of Ephrathah,
that Rakhel gave birth ,
and she had difficulty in giving birth .

17 And it came about, while she was having difficulty in giving birth ,

that the midwife said to her,
“Don’t be afraid,
because also this one is for you a son!”
18 And it came about, while her life was going out, because she was dying,

that she called his name,
“Son of My Grief” (lit. “Ben-‘oniy”),
but his father called him,
“Son of My Right Hand” (lit. “Ben-yamin”).

19 And Rakhel died,

and she was buried on the road to Ephrathah
(this is Beth-Lekhem).
20 And Yaaqov stood up a standing-stone on her burial,

(this is the standing stone of the burial of Rakhel unto today).

21 And Yisrael journeyed on,

and he set up his tent beyond “Tower of the Flock” [lit. “Migdal-Eder”].
22 And it came about when Yisrael was dwelling in that land,

that Reuven went and he laid with Bilhah , the concubine of his father,

Class Notes: Jacob

173 of 184

and Yisrael heard of it.

And the sons of Yaaqov were twelve:
23 Sons of Leah:

The firstborn of Yaaqov was Reuven ,
and Shim’on and Levi and Yehudah and Yissakar and Zebulun.
24 Sons of Rakhel:

Yoseph and Benyamin.
25 Sons of

Bilhah , female slave of Rakhel:

Dan and Naphtali.
26 Sons of Zilpah, female slave of Leah:

Gad and Asher.
These are the sons of Yaaqov
who were born to him in Paddan-aram.

27 And Yaaqov went to Yitskhaq his father,

at Mamre, Qiryat-Arba’ [= “City of the Four”],
(this is Hebron)
where Avraham and Yitskhaq had migrated.

28 And the days of Yitskhaq were one hundred and eighty years.

29 And Yitskhaq expired and he died,

and he was gathered to his fathers, old and full of days,
and they buried him, Esau and Yaaqov, his sons.

Genesis 35:16-29. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The Many Burials
There are four “burial” notices in this collection of stories, three of people and one of idols, each illuminating
the others.

Genesis 35:6, 8:

Genesis 35:17-20:

Genesis 35:29:

Deborah

Rakhel

Yitskhaq

And they gave to

And Yaaqov went to

And as [Rakhel’s] birth

And Yitskhaq died

Yaaqov all the foreign

Luz … (that is, Bethel) …

was harsh, her midwife

And she died )‫(ותמת‬,

)‫ … (וימת‬and they

gods (idols, ear rings),

said to her …

and he hid )‫ (טמן‬them

And she died )‫(ותמת‬,

buried him )‫(ויקברו‬,

Deborah the nursemaid

Genesis 35:4: Idols

Yaaqov Many Burials. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

174 of 184

Genesis 35:6, 8:

Genesis 35:17-20:

Genesis 35:29:

Deborah

Rakhel

Yitskhaq

under the oak

of Rebekah, and she

Rakhel, and she was

Esau and Yaaqov, his

)‫ (תחת האלה‬which is

was buried )‫(ותקבר‬

buried )‫ (ותקבר‬on the

sons.

in Shechem.

under the oak

road to Ephrathah (that

)‫ (תחת האלון‬and he

is, Bethlehem), and

called its name “Oak of

Yaaqov set up a pillar

Genesis 35:4: Idols

Weeping.”

upon her grave (that’s
the pillar of the grave
of Rakhel unto today).

Yaaqov Many Burials. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Rakhel’s death in Genesis 35:19 is set on analogy to the death of Deborah, to the burial of the idols in
Genesis 35:4, and also to Yitskhaq’s death which quickly follows.
The buried idols remind of us Rakhel’s theft of those same idols in chapter 31. Are we meant to conclude that
her death is somehow connected to Yaaqov's words back in Genesis 31:32? “The one with whom your elohim
are found, that one will not live!”
The death of Deborah reminds us of Rivqah's deception (in ch. 27) and the fact that her promise in
Genesis 27:45 to send for Yaaqov never came true. In fact, Rivqah is the only matriarch in Genesis whose
death and burial goes unmentioned. Only her maidservant is named, and Deborah too dies as Yaaqov returns
to the land.
“Genesis also tells us about the death and burial of each patriarch’s favorite wife (Sarah, Gen. 23:1-20;
Rachel, Gen. 35:19). The exception is Rebekah, apart from the summarizing statement in 49:31. Presumably
she died and was buried before Jacob returned from Aram-naharaim, for there is no reference to Jacob
being reunited with Rebekah. Rebekah is gone, though survived by her nurse, but only until Jacob arrives.
He not only does not get to see his mother, but he is forced to become undertaker for his late mother’s
nurse. Thus, one of Jacob's first experiences after coming back home is confronting death. By including the
name Rebekah, the author helps his reader recall her character, she who instigated the deception of Isaac.
Her punishment (implied at least) is that she will never get to see her son again.”
Hamilton, Victor P. (1995). The Book of Genesis, Chapters 18–50. Eerdmans. 378.
Yitskhaq's death brings the story full circle. Recall that at the beginning of Genesis 27, Yitskhaq said that the
day of his death may be near (Gen. 27:1-3). But in fact, he lived another 20 years, through Yaaqov's entire exile!
These four burials all link together because each one reminds the reader of some element of Yaaqov's
deceptions in the past. As he returns to the land, he is surrounded by reminders of his past and of the
deception and relational damage that he caused so many years ago.
Burying the idols: Recalls Rakhel’s deception of her father, which was parallel to Yaaqov's deception of
his father Yitskhaq.

Class Notes: Jacob

175 of 184

Burying Deborah: Recalls Rivqah’s deception of her husband, in league with Yaaqov, and how Yaaqov
never saw his mother again.
Burying Rakhel: Recalls Yaaqov's curse in Genesis 31:32, which said the one who stole the idols would
die, while sadly, Yaaqov, the one who stole the blessing, lives on.
Burying Yitskhaq: Recalls Yaaqov's deception of Yitskhaq, and how he died not long after he returned
from the land.

Reuben’s Lust for Power
The story of Reuben’s rape of Bilhah is another sordid moment for the sons of Yaaqov. Within the larger frame
of Genesis 33:18-35:29, there is a deliberate strategy to compare Reuben’s behavior with Shechem, son of
Hamor, from Genesis 34.

Yaaqov and Reuben

Yaaqov, Sh’khem, Shim’on, and Levi

Gen. 35:21 And Israel set out and he pitched his

Gen. 33:18-20 Yaaqov went to the city of

tent )‫ (ויט אהלה‬from there to Migdal Eder

Shechem in the land of Canaan when he returned
from Paddan-aram, and there he pitched his tent

)‫ … (נטה אהלו‬and he set up )‫ (ויצב‬an altar )‫(מזבח‬
Gen. 35:22 And while Israel dwelt in that land,

Gen. 34 Shechem son of Khamor rapes Dinah

Reuben went and laid with Bilhah, concubine of his

daughter of Yaaqov

father,
Gen. 34:5 And Yaaqov heard that he had defiled
and Israel heard of it .

Dinah his daughter … and Yaaqov kept silent .
Simeon and Levi deceive and murder the men of
Shechem.

Gen. 49:3-4 Reuben , you are my firstborn; my

Gen. 49:5-7 Simeon and Levi are brothers;

might and the beginning of my strength,

their swords are implements of violence .

preeminent in dignity and preeminent in power.

Let my soul not enter into their council; let not my

Uncontrolled as water, you shall not have

glory be united with their assembly; because in

preeminence, because you went up to your

their anger they murdered men , and in their self-

father’s bed; then you defiled it—he went up to

will they lamed oxen. Cursed be their anger, for it

my couch .

is fierce; and their wrath, for it is cruel. I will
disperse them in Yaaqov, and scatter them in
Israel.

Yaaqov, Reuben, and Sh'khem Comparison. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob
(2021).

In both sequences, Yaaqov pitches a tent right before a disaster hits his family.

Class Notes: Jacob

176 of 184

In the first sequence, Shechem rapes Yaaqov's daughter, leading to the violent revenge carried out by his
second- and third-born sons. In the second sequence, Reuben rapes Yaaqov's concubine, who was the slave
of Rakhel who just died.
Through this parallelism, Reuben is compared to both the abusive Shechem and to his violent brothers. Notice
that in Genesis 49, all three come in for critique and curse.
While Reuben’s motives are not stated, the reader is invited into a whole network of narrative patterns where
illicit sex is a way of challenging one’s rival.
The sons of Elohim (Gen. 6:1-4)
Ham “seeing the nakedness of his father” (Gen. 9:18-23)
Lot’s daughters having drunk sex with their father in the cave (Gen. 19:30-38)
Leah attempting to buy the conjugal rights of Yaaqov (Gen. 30:14-16)
Abner sleeping with Saul’s concubine (2 Sam. 3:7-8)
Absalom raping David’s concubines (2 Sam. 15:16 and 16:22)
Adoniyah’s request to sleep with David’s concubine (1 Kings 2:13-25)
“This incident is directly linked to the foregoing because it is Rachel's demise that presents the occasion for
Reuben’s act. By violating Bilhah, Reuben makes sure that she cannot supplant or even rival his mother's
[Leah’s] position of chief wife now that Rachel is dead ... In this connection, it is interesting that Reuben had
earlier been involved in the attempt to get his father to restore the conjugal rights of his mother (30:14–16).
As a result of Reuben’s cohabitation with Bilhah, she would thereby acquire the tragic status of 'living
widowhood ...' All this leads to the conclusion that Reuben’s bid to promote his mother’s rights is at the
same time a calculated challenge to his father’s authority. His move is more political than lustful. The
summary account in this verse hides an attempt to usurp the leadership of the Israelite tribes. Its failure is
reflected in Jacob's rebuke of 49:3–4, in which he removes Reuben from hegemony over the tribes.”
Sarna, Nahum M. (2001). Genesis, The JPS Torah Commentary. JPS. 245.

Reflection Question
How do the curses and consequences of Genesis 3:14-19 continue to show up in the Yaaqov story?

Class Notes: Jacob

177 of 184

