Session 7: Eden Springs in a Dry Land

Key Takeaways
Faithful to his promises, God blesses Yitskhaq despite his lack of trust.
In the biblical narrative, God’s blessing often becomes a source of jealousy and rivalry between the
chosen and the non-chosen characters.
The biblical authors weave repeated key words like thread, stitching narrative images into thematic
tapestries and adding layers of meaning to interconnected stories.

Yitskhaq’s Conflict With Abimelech

15 Now, all the wells which his father’s servants had

dug

in the days of Abraham his father,
the Philistines had stopped them up,
and they had filled them with dust.
16 And Abimelech said to Yitskhaq,

“ Go (‫ )הלך‬away from us,
because you are more powerful than us!”
17 And Yitskhaq went

(‫ )הלך‬from there,

and he camped in the wadi of Gerar,
and he dwelt (‫ )וישב‬there.
18 And Yitskhaq returned (‫)וישב‬

and he dug the wells of water
which had been dug in the days of his father Abraham,
which the Philistines had stopped up after the death of Abraham,
and he called their names,
the names which his father had called them.

Dispute #1
19 And Yitskhaq's servants dug in the wadi,

and they found there a well of waters of life ,
20 but the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled (‫ )ריב‬with the herdsmen of Yitskhaq, saying,

“The waters are ours!”
And he called the name of the well “Contention (‫”)עשק‬
because they contended (‫ )התעשקו‬with him.
Dispute #2

Class Notes: Jacob

42 of 184

21 And they dug another well ,

and they also quarreled (‫ )ריב‬over it,
and he called its name “Opposition (‫)שטנה‬.”

Dispute #3
22 And he moved away from there

and he dug another well .
And they did not quarrel (‫ )ריב‬over it;
and he called its name “Wide-places (‫)רחבות‬,”
and he said,
“Because now Yahweh has widened a place (‫ )הרחיב‬for us,
and we will be fruitful (‫ )פרינו‬in the land.”

23 And he went up from there to Beersheba (Well of Seven/Oath)
24 and Yahweh appeared to him that night and said,

“I am the God of your father Abraham.
Do not fear, for I am with you,
and I will bless you,
and multiply (‫ )הרביתי‬your descendants,
for the sake of my servant Abraham.”
25 And he built an altar there,

and called upon the name of Yahweh,
and he pitched his tent there,
and there the servants of Yitskhaq

dug a well .

Genesis 26:15-25. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
This story is about God’s miraculous provision of water from the ground for Yitskhaq in the face of two major
obstacles: (1) It’s a time of famine (Gen. 26:1), which presumes a drought, and (2) the nations are at odds with
God’s chosen one through a series of escalating conflicts about access to water.
After we descend from the heights of God’s blessing in Genesis 26:1-5 (which recalls the creation blessing of
Genesis 1), we now enter the barren deserts of a famine land. But in the middle of the desert, Yitskhaq
rediscovers something that the Philistines attempted to stop: access to fresh spring water.
Notice how the design of 26:15-18 highlights the opposition of the Philistines.

A - The Philistines stopped up Avraham’s wells (Gen. 26:15).
B - Abimelech banishes Yitskhaq for fear of his power (Gen. 26:16-17).
A’ - Yitskhaq rediscovers Abraham’s wells and renames them (Gen. 26:18).

Class Notes: Jacob

43 of 184

In the face of opposition from the nations, Yitskhaq recovers his father’s wells, and he discovers a new well of
“living water” )‫(חיים מים‬. This is a figure of speech in Hebrew for “running” or “fresh water” (see Lev. 14:5;
Jer. 2:13; Zech. 14:8). As a narrative image, it recalls the key turning point in the story about the creation of
Eden.

Genesis 2-3

Genesis 26

Gen. 2:4-7

Gen. 26:1 A time of famine.

4

In the day when Yahweh Elohim made the land and skies,

5

and no shrub of the field was yet in the land,

and no plant of the field had yet sprouted,
for Yahweh Elohim had not sent rain upon the land,
and there was no human to work the ground,
6

but a stream/flow would go up from the land

and it would water the whole face of the ground,
7

then Yahweh Elohim formed the human of dust from the ground,

and he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life ;

Gen. 26:15-19 Yitskhaq
discovers Avraham’s well, that the
Philistines had stopped up with
dust .
Yitskhaq digs in the dirt for new
wells ...
... and discovers waters of life .

and the human became a living being.

Gen. 2:18-25 God turns the one human into more than one, by

Gen. 26:16 Avimelek accuses

taking flesh and “bone” )‫ (עצם‬from one of his sides.

Yitskhaq of becoming too
powerful )‫ (עצם‬because he has
too many people and animals in
his camp (see Gen. 26:13).

Gen. 3:21-24 Adam and Eve are banished from Eden.

Gen. 26:16 Avimelek banishes
Yitskhaq from his city.

Genesis 2-3 Versus Genesis 26. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Recalling motifs in this way is a common narrative strategy of the biblical authors to show how the current
story is walking through the sequence of themes set up in Genesis 1-9. Recalling the motifs in this way also
sets our expectations in order to introduce a twist.

Sibling Rivalry and Blessing or Curse
Next, the conflict escalates between Yitskhaq’s shepherds and the Philistine shepherds. This story recalls what
happened after the Eden creation story: the failure of Adam and Eve and the rising conflict between rival
siblings. This is accomplished by recalling the same theme from the story of Abraham—the conflict between
Abraham’s shepherds and Lot’s shepherds.
Genesis 13:2, 5-8 Instructor's Translation

Class Notes: Jacob

44 of 184

2

And Avram was very heavy with herds and with silver and with gold ...

5

Now, also belonging to Lot, who went with Avram,

were flocks and cattle and tents ...
7

And there was a dispute between the shepherds of the herd of

Avram and between the shepherds of the herd of Lot ...
8

And Avram said to Lot,

“Don’t let there be disputing between me and between you,
between my shepherds and between your shepherds,
for we men are brothers!”
Genesis 26:14, 19-20 Instructor's Translation
14

and [Yitskhaq] had possessions of flocks

and herds and a great household, and the
Philistines envied him.
19

And the servants of Yitskhaq dug in the valley

and they found there a well of living water,
20

and the shepherds of Gerar disputed with

the shepherds of Yitskhaq, saying,
“The water is ours!”
The dispute between the shepherds recalls the exact same scene from the story of Abraham and Lot. In that
story, God’s blessing on Abraham that resulted in many possessions is the very thing that creates the conflict
among rival family members.
This recalls the motif of Cain and Abel’s sibling rivalry after the banishment from Eden, along with a very subtle
clue.
The very center of the paragraph in Genesis 26:15-25 focuses on the second dispute between the
shepherd of Yitskhaq and Philistia. This dispute is singled out by its unique formula that sets it apart
from the first and third dispute.
The second disputed well is named Sitnah, that is, “Satan-place” )‫(שטנה‬. It’s a use of the noun “satan” in
its literal sense, “opposition.” And while on the narrative level it simply describes the conflict between
rival tribes, it also recalls the important analogy between sin in Genesis 4:7 and the snake in Genesis 3.

A Flood, a Tent, an Altar, and a Blessing
After an extremely subtle walk through the themes of Genesis 1-4, the narrative highlights the rising conflict
regarding the wells of water. This is a very subtle recall from the paragraph that described the rising waters of
the flood in Genesis 7:17-20.
Genesis 7:17-20 Instructor's Translation
17

And the flood was forty days upon the land,

and the waters were great )‫(רבה‬
and they lifted up the ark,

Class Notes: Jacob

45 of 184

and it rose up over the land,
18

and the waters were mighty )‫(גבר‬

and they were very great )‫ (רבה‬upon the land,
and the ark went on the face of the waters,
19

and the waters were mighty )‫(גבר‬, very very much, upon the land,

and they covered all the high mountains which are under the skies,

20

fifteen cubits above,

the waters were mighty )‫(גבר‬,
and they covered the mountains;
The word “mighty” )‫ (גבר‬is the same Hebrew root of the word “mighty warrior” )‫ (גבור‬that refers to the
Nephilim and also to powerful ancient Near Eastern kings who were violent and volatile (Nimrod in Gen. 10:8-1
). Recall that these Philistine shepherds are servants of King Abimelech of Philistia, who sees Yitskhaq’s
presence as a threat to his power. That is, Abimelech is also a gibbor )‫(גבור‬, whose servants are causing a
“rising flood” of conflict over the waters!
In the midst of this conflict, God provides for Yitskhaq, who goes off and finds a place of rest associated with
the images of Noah’s story during and after the flood.

Genesis 8-9

Genesis 26

Gen. 8:6-10 Noah waits for multiple series of

Gen. 26:23-25 Yitskhaq goes to “Well of Seven”

“seven” )‫ (שבע‬days as the waters recede

)‫ (באר שבע‬and finds water there in the midst of the
famine and drought

Gen. 8:20-21 Noah builds an altar

Gen. 26:25 Yitskhaq builds an altar

Gen. 9:1-3 Noah is blessed by God and promised a

Gen. 26:24 Yitskhaq is blessed by God and

large family

promised a large family

Gen. 9:19-21 Noah sets up a tent in a garden

Gen. 26:25 Yitskhaq sets up his tent at “Well of
Seven”

Flood Imagery in Yitskhaq’s Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

This is a not-so-conspicuous recall of the story of Noah after the flood, mirrored in the story of Yitskhaq. But
one major theme is absent: The conflict that started the flood is resolved through a covenant. And that's what
the next paragraph of the Yitskhaq story is all about.

Reflection Question
The biblical authors connect each scene in the Genesis scroll to a repeating pattern of themes established in
its early chapters. What connections to earlier stories come to mind while studying Genesis 26:12-25? How do
these connections help us meditate on the meaning of this story?

Class Notes: Jacob

46 of 184

