Session 11: Parting of the Brothers

Key Takeaways
The separation of Yaaqov and Esau resounds with notes of the Cain and Abel theme, but with many
inversions and surprises.
Rivqah indeed receives the curse for her scheming with Yaaqov when she says goodbye to her beloved
son, never to see him again.
Esau, in his anger, is set on analogy to both Cain and God, presenting a complex portrait of Yaaqov’s
adversary.

Esau’s Anger and Yaaqov's Flight

41 And Esau was opposed to Yaaqov,

on account of the blessing with which his father blessed him,
and Esau said in his heart,
“The days of mourning for my father draw near,
and I will murder Yaaqov my brother.”
42 And it was reported to Rivqah, the words of Esau her son, the greater one,

and she sent and called for Yaaqov her son, the smaller one,
and she said to him,
“Look, Esau your brother is comforting himself about you, to murder you!
43 So now, my son, listen to my voice,

and arise, flee for yourself to Lavan , my brother, to Haran .
44 And you will dwell with him one set of days,

until the hot-anger of your brother turns away ,
45 until the anger of your brother turns away from you ,

and he forgets what you have done to him,
and I will send and take you from there.
Why should I be bereaved of the two of you in one day?!”

Genesis 27:41-45. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Esau, Cain, and the Flood-Sending God
In Genesis 27:41, Esau is set on analogy with Cain who is angry at God’s favor on his brother, and also with God
who responds to human evil by sending the flood.

Class Notes: Jacob

65 of 184

Esau in Genesis 27

Cain & Abel in Genesis 4

Yahweh in Genesis 6

Gen. 27:34 and [Esau] cried

Gen. 4:8 And Qayin spoke to

Gen. 6:5-13 And Yahweh saw that

out a great cry )‫(ויצעק צעקה‬

Hevel )‫ (הבל‬his brother ,

multiplied was the badness of humanity

and it came about when they

in the land, and every purpose of the

Gen. 27:41 And Esau held a

were in the field that Qayin

plans of his heart )‫ (לבו‬was only bad

grudge against Yaaqov ...

rose up to Hevel his brother

all the day,

and he said in his heart

and he murdered him

and Yahweh consoled himself )‫(נחם‬

)‫ אמר‬+ ‫ (בלבו‬, “The days of

)‫ אח‬+ ‫ (הרג‬.

that he made humanity in the land, and
he was pained in his heart )‫ (לבו‬.

mourning )‫ הבל‬/ ‫ (אבל‬are
near, and I will murder

Gen. 4:10 What have you

And Yahweh said, “I will wipe away

Yaaqov my brother

done? The voice of the shed-

humanity that I created from the face of

blood of your brother is

the ground, from humanity to animals

crying out )‫ (צעק‬to me from

to creeping things and to birds of the

the ground.

skies, for I console myself )‫ (נחם‬that I

)‫ הרג‬+ ‫ (אחי‬.“
Gen. 27:42 Behold, Esau
your brother

is consoling

himself )‫ (נחם‬regarding
you, to murder you )‫(הרג‬

have made them. ...”
And Elohim said to Noakh, “ The end

)‫ (קץ‬of all flesh has come before me ,
because the land is filled with violence
because of them, and behold, I am
going to ruin them with land."
Gen. 8:21 And Yahweh smelled the
soothing smell; and Yahweh said to his
heart )‫ (לבו‬, "I will never again curse
the ground on account of humanity,
because the purpose of the heart of
humanity is bad from his youth; and I
will never again strike all life, as I just
did."

Esau, Cain, and the Flood-Sending God. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The Analogies
Just as non-chosen Cain was angry and spilled the blood of his chosen brother Abel, murdering him, and his
blood cried out to God, so now the non-chosen Esau is angry so he cries out and wants to murder his chosen
brothers.
Just as God had to console himself and speak in his heart for making a humanity whose violence created “the
end” that has come up before him, so now Esau cries out and plans to console himself by murdering his
treacherous brother.

Class Notes: Jacob

66 of 184

The Point of the Analogies
The narrative strategy portrays Rivqah and Yitskhaq’s deceptive grab for the blessing as an act akin to Adam
and Eve’s failure to trust God’s command in the garden.
Now we’ve come to the next generation. And just as Cain failed to honor God’s choice of Abel, so now Esau
fails to honor God’s choice of Yaaqov (though Yaaqov hardly deserves it). This causes an outbreak of violence
that leads to righteous anger and a threat to life itself.

Genesis 2

Genesis 3

Genesis 4-9

Genesis 10-11

• God’s blessing of

• Wife and husband

• Sibling rivalry, angry brother

• A journey east

fruitful seed

are deceived

murders brother, the blood cries

• A tower in the

• Garden

• Violation of God’s

out

skies

abundance in the

word

• Inappropriate taking of wives

• Scattering of

midst of a desert

• Attempt to

from the wrong lineage

Babylon

• Sacred space of

achieve the

• The outcry comes up to God

God’s presence by

blessing in the

who speaks in his heart, consoles

the tree of life on

wrong time and way

himself and decides to send the

Mount Eden

flood
• So God chooses to send his
chosen one away to safety, Noah

Genesis 26

Genesis 27:1-29

Genesis 27:30-28:9

Genesis 28:10-22

• God's blessing on

• Deception

• Sibling rivalry, angry brother

• A journey east

Yitskhaq, abundant

between wife and

cries out, speaks in his heart to

• A tower in the

food and water in

husband

console himself and murder his

skies

the midst of a

• Violation of God’s

brother

famine

word

• Inappropriate taking of wives

• Yitskhaq worships

• Struggle to

from the wrong lineage

Yahweh by tent and

achieve the

• The plan reaches Yaaqov’s

altar at Well of

blessing in the

mother who plans to send him

Seven

wrong time and way

away to safety

Replaying the Earlier Genesis Cycle in Genesis 26-28. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Jacob (2021).

Taking the Wrong Wives

46 And Rivqah said to Yitskhaq,

“I hate my life , because of the Hittite daughters .
If Yaaqov took a wife from daughters of the Hittites like these,
from the daughters of the land ,
why then should I live ?!”

Class Notes: Jacob

67 of 184

28:1 And Yitskhaq called to Yaaqov,

and he blessed him
and he commanded him,
and he said to him,
“You will not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan .
2 Arise, go to Paddan-aram ,

to the house of Bethuel , the father of your mother,
and take for yourself from there a wife,
from the daughters of

Lavan , brother of your mother.

3 And El-Shadday, may he bless you,

and may he make your fruitful
and may he bless you
and may you become an assembly of peoples,
4 and may he give to you the blessing of Abraham ,

to you and to your seed with you,
so you can possess the land of your migrations
which Elohim has given to Abraham .

5 And Yitskhaq sent Yaaqov away,

and he went to Paddan-aram ,
to Lavan , son of Bethuel the Aramean,
brother of Rivqah, mother of Yaaqov and Esau.

6 And Esau saw

that Yitskhaq had blessed Yaaqov,
and that he sent him to Paddan-aram ,
to take for himself a wife from there,
when he blessed him,
and that he commanded him, saying,
“You will not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan ,”
7 and that Yaaqov listened to his father and to his mother,

and that he went to Paddan-aram .
8 And Esau saw

that the daughters of Canaan were bad in the eyes of Yitskhaq his father,
9 and Esau went to Yishmael,

and he took Makhelath,
daughter of Yishmael ,
son of Abraham,
sister of Nebaioth,
in addition to his wives,
for himself as a wife.

Class Notes: Jacob

68 of 184

Genesis 27:46-28:9. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
The analogy with the flood narrative continues as the theme of marriage enters the picture. The shift from
Esau’s plan to murder Yaaqov to Rivqah’s plan to send away Yaaqov seems abrupt. But the narrative sequence
makes more sense once we see that we're walking through the themes of Genesis 1-9 in order.
Just as illegitimate marriages between Heaven and Earth were the third and final failure narrative in Genesis 19, so here the focus is on Esau’s illegitimate marriages to Canaanite women that threaten the integrity of the
promised lineage.
Genesis 6:1-2 Instructor's Translation
1

And it came about, when humanity began to multiply on the face of the land, and daughters were born

to/for them,

2

and the sons of Elohim saw the daughters of humanity that they were good , and they took

wives for themselves, whomever they chose.
Genesis 28:8-9 Instructor's Translation
8

And Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan were bad in the eyes of Yitskhaq his father,

9

and Esau went

to Yishmael, and he took Makhelath, daughter of Yishmael, for himself as a wife.
There is also an ironic inversion of the Abraham story at this point: Rivqah, who left Mesopotamia in a great act
of trust that resembled Abraham, now sends away her son to Mesopotamia because of her lack of trust in
God’s promise of blessing.

Abraham, Yitskhaq and Rivqah: Genesis 24

Yitskhaq, Rivqah, and Yaaqov: Genesis 28

Abraham does not want Yitskhaq to marry the

Yitskhaq and Rivqah do not want Yaaqov to marry

Canaanites and sends his servant to Mesopotamia

the Canaanites, and they send Yaaqov to

to his extended family

Mesopotamia to their extended family

Gen. 24:3-4 so I can make you swear an oath by

Gen. 28:1-2 You will not take a wife from the

Yahweh, the Elohim of the skies and the Elohim of

daughters of Canaan . Get up, go to Paddan-

the land, that you will not take a wife for my son

aram, to the house of Bethuel, the father of your

from the daughters of the Canaanites , in whose

mother , and take for yourself from there a wife .

midst I am dwelling. Rather, to my land and to my
family you will go , and you will take a wife for
my son , for Yitskhaq.”

Abraham’s servant meets Rivqah, who waters the

Yaaqov goes, meets Rakhel at a well, and he waters

animals, at a well

the animals

Abraham's servant meets Lavan

Yaaqov meets Lavan

Comparing Genesis 24 and 28. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

69 of 184

Reflection Question
Why would the biblical authors connect Esau’s anger to God’s own anger over the outcry before the flood?

Class Notes: Jacob

70 of 184

