Session 12: Jacob at the Gate of Heaven

Key Takeaways
Yaaqov’s response subtly twists God’s promise of blessing and presence into a bargaining arrangement.
Yaaqov seeing the gate of Heaven in a dream points to an awareness of heavenly realities not accessible
to our conscious senses.
Jesus envisions himself as the ramp that provides a way for Heaven and Earth to be united as one.

Yaaqov's Exile in the House of Lavan
Genesis 28:10-22

Genesis 31:1-32:1

Yaaqov Flees from Esau + Dream at Beth-el +

Genesis 29:1-30:43

Stone & Pillars + Promise of Blessing

Yaaqov's Exile in Lavan's House

Yaaqov Flees From Lavan
31:1-16

28:10-11

28:12-15

28:16-22

29:1-30

31:43-32:1

30:25-43

Yaaqov's Dream

31:17-42

Yaaqov & Lavan

Lavan Deceives

29:31-30:24

Yaaqov Deceives

Report + Recall of

Lavan Chases &

Make Peace

Yaaqov With

Yaaqov's Rival

Lavan With His

Beth-el Promise

Accuses Yaaqov

Through

Rakhel & Leah

Wives & Sons

Flocks

& Blessing

Covenant at
Stone Pillars

Genesis 28:10-32:1. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The chart above is adapted from Andrew Teeter's “Genesis Class Notes” and from the principles in his essay,
"Biblical Symmetry and Its Modern Detractors," a paper delivered at the 2019 International Organization for the
Study of the Old Testament.
This section makes up the center of the Yaaqov narrative, and it recounts his 20-year exile in Kharan, the place
from which his grandfather Abraham migrated to Canaan. Here, Yaaqov's deception is turned back upon him
by his uncle Lavan, and what he did to his father and brother is now done to him. The deceptions and counterdeceptions escalate, and the only thing that brings this deception-fest to a halt is a covenant of peace
between brothers.
The three parts of this section have an overall symmetrical design.

Genesis 28:10-22
God Appears to Yaaqov at Beth-el
28:12 God appears

“in a dream”

during the night

28:13 God appears as the “Elohim of Avraham and Yitskhaq, your fathers”
“Look, I am with you”
“I will return you to this land”
28:18 Yaaqov took a stone )‫ (אבן‬and set up a standing-pillar )‫(מצבה‬

Class Notes: Jacob

72 of 184

28:20 Yaaqov vows a vow )‫ (נדר‬to be loyal to Yahweh

Genesis 29:1-30:43
Yaaqov’s Exile in Lavan’s house

Genesis 31:1-32:1

• 31:1-16 God Appears to Yaaqov in Exile
• 31:10 God appears “in a dream”
• “Return to the land of your fathers and your birth-family ”
• “and I will be with you”
• “return to the land of your birth-family ”
• 31:17-42 Lavan Chases after Yaaqov
• 31:43-32:1 Yaaqov and Lavan Make a Covenant of Peace
• 31:45 Yaaqov took a stone )‫ (אבן‬and set up a standing-pillar
• 31:53 Yaaqov swears an oath )‫ (שבע‬to keep his promise to Lavan
• 31:53 Yaaqov swears by “the Elohim of Nahor, Avraham, and Yitskhaq”
Genesis 28:10-32:1. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Yaaqov Meets God at Bethel

10 And Yaaqov went out from Beer- Sheva (‫“ = • שבע‬seven/oath“)

and he went to Haran
11 And he encountered the place ,

and he stayed the night there, for the sun had gone down
and he took from the stones (‫ )אבן‬of the place ,
and he set his head-rest (‫)מראשתיו‬
and he laid down in that place .

12 And he had a dream

and behold, a ramp was set (‫ )מצב‬on the land,
and its head (‫)ראש‬

was in the skies

and behold, messengers of Elohim were going up and going down upon it.

13 And behold, Yahweh stood (‫ )נצב‬upon it and said,

“I myself (‫ )אני‬am Yahweh the Elohim of Abraham your father and the Elohim of Yitskhaq your father;
the land that you are lying on,
to you I will give it, and to your seed.
14 And your seed will be like the dust of the land,

and you will break out to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south,

Class Notes: Jacob

73 of 184

and in you all the families of the ground will find blessing, and in your seed.

15 And behold, I myself (‫ )אנכי‬am with you

and I will keep you everywhere you go
and I will return you back to this ground,
indeed, I will not abandon you
until I do what I have spoken to you.”

16 And Yaaqov woke up from his sleep,

and he said,
“Surely Yahweh is in this place ,
and I did not know it.”
17 And Yaaqov was afraid,

and he said,
“How fearful is this place ,
this is none other than the house of Elohim [= “Beth-Elohim”] ,
and this is the gate (‫ )שער‬of the skies .”

18 And Yaaqov got up in the morning

and he took the stone (‫ )אבן‬which he set for a head-rest (‫ )מראשתיו‬,
and he set it as a pillar (‫ )מצבה‬,
and he poured olive oil upon its head (‫ )ראשה‬,
19 and he called the name of that place , “Beth-El” [= “House of El”]

Now, Luz (“Almond-tree”) was the name of the city at its beginning (‫ )ראשנה‬.

20 And Yaaqov vowed a vow (‫ )וידר…נדר‬, saying:

“If Elohim will be with me,
and keep me on this path which I am going
and if he will give me bread to eat and clothing to wear,
21 and if I return to the house of my father,

then Yahweh will be my Elohim,
22 and then the stone (‫ )אבן‬which I placed as a pillar (‫ )מצבה‬,

it will be a house of Elohim [= “Beth-Elohim”]
and then everything which you will give me,
I will surely tithe a tenth (‫ )עשר אעשרנו‬of it to you.”

Genesis 28:10-22. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Leaving Canaan, Leaving Eden
As Yaaqov leaves the land promised to Abraham’s seed, he encounters divine messengers coming and going
between the skies and the land. He happens upon a portal, as it were, between Heaven and Earth. This is a notvery-subtle recall of the cherubim that Yahweh posted at the entrance of Eden when he exiled the humans.

Class Notes: Jacob

74 of 184

Genesis 3:22-24 Instructor's Translation
22

And Yahweh Elohim said,

“Look, the human has become like one of us, knowing good and bad,
and now so that he won’t send out his hand and take also from the tree of life,
and eat and live forever ...”
23

and Yahweh Elohim sent him out from the garden

to work the ground from which he was taken.
24

And he banished the human

and he made to dwell at the east of the garden of Eden
cherubim and the flame of the whirling sword to guard the way to the tree of life.
The strength of this analogy is bolstered by the fact that when Yaaqov returns from his exile in Lavan’s house
and crosses back into the land, he has another encounter with divine messengers.

Genesis 28:10-22
Yaaqov meets “divine

Genesis 32:2-3
Genesis 29-31

Yaaqov meets “divine

messengers”

Yaaqov’s exile in

messengers”

)‫ (מלאכי אלהים‬at the

Lavan’s house

)‫ (מלאכי אלהים‬at the

border of the land

border of the land

“And he said, ‘This is

“And he said, ‘This is

the house of El!’”

the camp of Elohim’”

“And he called the

“And he called the

name of the place,

name of the place

‘House of El.’”

‘Two-Camps’”

Genesis 28:10-32:3. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

There is another important parallel between the exile of Adam and Eve and Yaaqov. In the midst of a tragic
departure, God promises that a future seed will restore the Eden blessing to the world.

God’s Curse on the Snake

God’s Blessing on the Snake-like Yaaqov

Gen. 3:14-15 And Yahweh Elohim said to the

Gen. 28:13-14 ... “I am Yahweh,

snake,

the Elohim of Avraham your father,

“Because you have done this thing,

and the Elohim of Yitskhaq your father;

you are cursed more than every beast

the land that you are lying on,

and more than every living creature of the field;

to you I will give it, and to your seed,

Blessing the Snake-like Yaaqov. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

75 of 184

God’s Curse on the Snake

God’s Blessing on the Snake-like Yaaqov

on your belly you will go,

and your seed will be like the dust of the land,

and dust you will eat,

and you will break out to the west and to the east

all the days of your life.

and to the north and to the south,

And I will set hostility

and in you all the families of the land will find

between you and the woman,

blessing, and in your seed. ”

and between your seed and her seed;
he will strike your head
and you will strike his heel.”

Blessing the Snake-like Yaaqov. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

However, notice the contrast. Yaaqov is likened to the deceitful snake (both are heel-strikers), but instead of
receiving a curse, God gives him a blessing. Instead of a sentence of death, he is given a promise of life.

Heaven and Earth, Angels and Ultimate Reality
The imagery of Yaaqov's dream reveals a core aspect of the Bible’s portrait of reality: Heaven and Earth are
distinct realms, but they're not wholly separate. Rather, they are made for one another, and they intersect and
overlap in ways that humans only dimly perceive. Eden is the foundational biblical image of a realm where
Heaven and Earth are one. But this story takes us one step further, and it shows us how Heaven and Earth can
overlap when a person's consciousness is heightened to awareness of this overlap.
The fact that Yaaqov is asleep and dreaming, and this is what makes him able to perceive Heaven’s presence
linked to Earth, is of greatest significance. Our normal, socialized, conscious states only make us aware of
some aspects of reality.
The dream is also an Eden image, where the first “dream” is alluded to when Elohim causes a deep sleep to fall
upon the human so that he can be divided into two (see Gen. 2:18-25).
Genesis 28:12 Instructor's Translation
And he had a dream
and behold,
a ramp was set on the land,
and its head was in the skies
and behold,
messengers of Elohim were going up and going down upon it.
The Hebrew word for “ramp,” or possibly “stairway,” is sullam )‫(סלם‬, and it appears only here in all of ancient
Hebrew literature. It is related to the word simmiltu in Akkadian, a ancient cognate Semitic language related to
Hebrew, which means “stepped ramp” and could refer to the tall, ascending stairways that lead to the top of
Mesopotamian ziggurats, sacred temples that connected Heaven and Earth with an altar on top.
The great Etemenanki ziggurat in Babylon, and the accompanying Esagila temple, was one of the largest
temple structures in the ancient world. It was built, remodeled, and rebuilt several times within the 700 years

Class Notes: Jacob

76 of 184

between the 14th and 7th century B.C.E.

Mustafin, O. (2006) Wikipedia Commons

“Etemenanki” is Sumerian for “Tower of the Foundation of Heaven and Earth.” Its origins in the 14th century are
mentioned in the famous Babylonian epic of creation Enuma Elish, which tells of Marduk’s rise to power as the
old Babylonian empire came to dominate Mesopotamia in the 1200s B.C.E.
The point of this image is that Yaaqov is seeing the reality to which ancient temples pointed: the intersection
of Heaven and Earth, of the divine and human realms in one place.

Eden, Babylon, and Bethel
Yaaqov's exile is also set on analogy to the sons of Noah who go east and attempt to build their own cosmic
mountain that reaches to the skies.

Genesis 11

Genesis 27-29

1

Gen. 29:1 And Yaaqov lifted his feet, and he went

Now the whole land was one language and one in

words.
2

to the land of the sons of the East .

And it came about as they journeyed east

that they found a plain in the land of Shinar
and they settled there.

Gen. 28:17 This is none other than the house of

3

Elohim, and this is the gate of the skies.

And they said each to his neighbor,

“Come, let us brick bricks and burn them as
burnt.”

18

And they used brick for stone, and they used tar

Gen. 27:18-19

for mortar.

morning,

4

and he took the stone which he placed for a head-

And they said,
“Come, let us build for ourselves a city ,
and a tower whose head will be in the skies ,

And Yaaqov got up in the

space, and he placed it as a standing-stone , and
poured olive oil upon its head,

19

and he called the

name of that place Beth-El (= “House of Elohim”).
Journey East and a Tower to the Skies. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

77 of 184

Genesis 11

Genesis 27-29

and let us make for ourselves a name,
lest we be scattered upon the face of all the
land.”

Gen. 27:22 And then this stone which I placed as

...

a standing-stone, it will be a House of Elohim (lit.

9

“Beth-El”)

Therefore its name was called Babylon , because

there Yahweh made-babble of the language of all
the land, and from there Yahweh scattered them
upon the face of all the land.

Journey East and a Tower to the Skies. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

There is an important contrast here between Yaaqov's experience and the Babylonian builders.
The Babylonians are actively attempting to build their way back up to the heavens. Yaaqov is a passive
recipient of the vision. His inactivity emphasizes that the connection between Heaven and Earth cannot
be achieved by humans, but only received as a gift.
The Hebrew word for Babylon is bavel, )‫ (בבל‬which is a Hebrew spelling of the Akkadian word bab-il,
which means “gate of the gods.” Notice that this is precisely what Yaaqov calls the stair-ramp he sees in
his vision.
Within the compositional design of Genesis 1-11, the story of the building of Babylon forms a crucially
important match to the story of Eden. The fact that both stories are being hyperlinked to within this story
about Yaaqov shows the author’s awareness of their linkage.

Genesis 1:1-2:3

Genesis 2:4-3:24

Genesis 4-5

• Creation out of the waters

• Eden = cosmic mountain where

• Cain’s violence and further

heaven and earth are one

exile from Eden

• Blessing, failure, and curse in

• He builds a city for his own

the garden

family name, and its outcry

• Exile to the east of the garden

reaches up to God

Genesis 6:1-9:17

Genesis 9:18-27

Genesis 9:28-11:9

• De-creation and re-creation by

• Ararat = cosmic mountain

• Ham’s descendants are further

the waters

where Heaven and Earth are

exiled from Eden

reconciled

• The building of the city of

• Blessing, failure, and curse in

Babylon for their own name,

the vineyard garden

and its arrogance reaches up

• Exile to the east of Eden

to God

Genesis 25:19-34

Genesis 26-28:9

Genesis 28:10-22

• Creation of Yitskhaq’s sons out

• Canaan = A new Eden where

• Yaaqov is further exiled from

Eden, Babylon, and Bethel. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

78 of 184

of an infertile womb

God’s blessing is realized in a

the new Eden

time of famine

• He encounters Heaven and

• Blessing, failure, and non-

Earth, and he builds a sacred

blessing in the new Eden

pillar named “House of El” that

• Yaaqov exiled to the east

will eventually become an
Israelite temple

Eden, Babylon, and Bethel. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The Blessing of Abraham, Yitskhaq, and Yaaqov
God’s words to Yaaqov blend together phrases from God’s blessing speeches to both Abraham and Yitskhaq.

God’s Promise to Yaaqov: Genesis 28:13-15

God’s Promises to Yitskhaq and Abraham

I am the Lord, the God of your father Abraham and

Gen. 26:24 (God to Yitskhaq)

the God of Yitskhaq;

I am the God of Abraham your father

the land on which you lie, I will give it to you and

Gen. 13:14-17 (God to Abraham)

to your seed .

14

Now lift up your eyes and look from the place

where you are, northward and southward and
eastward and westward ;
Your seed will also be like the dust of the earth ,
15

and you will spread out to the west and to the
east and to the north and to the south ;

for all the land which you see, I will give it to

you and to your seed forever.
16

I will make your seed as the dust of the earth ,

so that if anyone can number the dust of the earth,
then your seed can also be numbered.
17

Arise, walk about the land through its length

and breadth; for I will give it to you .

God’s Promises to Yaaqov, Abraham, and Yitskhaq. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

79 of 184

God’s Promise to Yaaqov: Genesis 28:13-15

God’s Promises to Yitskhaq and Abraham

and all the families of the ground )‫(משפחות האדמה‬

Gen. 12:3 And all the families of the ground

will discover blessing )‫ (ונברכו‬through you )‫(בך‬

)‫ (משפחות האדמה‬will discover blessing )‫(ונברכו‬

and through your seed )‫ (בזרעך‬.

through you )‫(בך‬
Gen. 22:18 And all the nations )‫ (גוי‬of the land will
discover blessing )‫(והתברכו‬

through your seed

)‫(בזרעך‬
Gen. 26:4 And all the nations )‫ (גוי‬of the land will
discover blessing )‫(והתברכו‬

through your seed

)‫(בזרעך‬
Behold, I am with you )‫(אנכי עמך‬

Gen. 26:3 I will be with you (‫)עמך‬

God’s Promises to Yaaqov, Abraham, and Yitskhaq. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Jacob (2021).

Yaaqov's Two Curious Responses
Yaaqov takes God’s promises and turns them into negotiating points.

Yahweh’s Promise

Yaaqov’s Negotiated Response

Gen. 28:13b-15

Gen. 28:20-22

And he said,

And Yaaqov vowed a vow, saying:

“I am Yahweh the God of Avraham your father

“ If

and the God of Yitskhaq your father;

and

the land that you are lying on,

going ,

to you I will give it, and to your seed,

and if he will give me bread to eat and clothing to

and your seed will be like the dust of the land,

wear,

and you will break out to the west, and to the east,

and

if

then

Yahweh will be my God .

and to the north, and to the south
and in you all the families of the land will find
blessing,
and in your seed.
And behold, I am with you,
and I will keep you everywhere you go

God will be with me,
if

he will keep me on this path which I am

I return to the house of my father,

And then this stone which I placed as a pillar,
it will be a house of God,
and then everything which you will give me,
I will surely offer a tenth of it to you.”

and I will return you back to this land,

Yaaqov’s Two Curious Responses. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

80 of 184

Yahweh’s Promise

Yaaqov’s Negotiated Response

and I will not abandon you
until I do what I have spoken to you.”

Yaaqov’s Two Curious Responses. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Yaaqov takes God’s promise of protection and blessing and turns it into a transactional obligation on God’s
part.
Yahweh offers to give the blessing of Yaaqov's ancestors to him as a gift, but Yaaqov turns it into a condition:
Yahweh can be his God if he protects him.
Notice that Yaaqov reduces the cosmic scope of the divine promises down to the confines of his own personal
survival (“food and clothing”) and return to the land. God’s promise to Yaaqov is about his seed, the land,
fruitfulness, and blessing for the nations. Yaaqov's response only repeats what is important for his personal
survival (note that “food and clothing” is exactly what Yaaqov used to deceive his brother and father).
“Jacob the trickster is now bound to this God who presides over all the trickery yet to come in the narrative.
God has been committed to Jacob since the oracle of 25:23. But only now is Jacob also bound. Jacob's
response strikes one as a genuine act of faith. But Jacob will be Jacob. Even in this solemn moment, he still
sounds like a bargain-hunter. He still adds an ‘if’ (v. 20).”
Brueggemann, Walter (1982). Genesis: Interpretation, A Bible Commentary for Teaching and Preaching.
Westminster John Knox Press. 248.
After negotiating with God’s promise, Yaaqov goes on to promise to build God a temple—something that God
has not asked for. This is similar to David’s offer to build a temple for God when God never asked for such a
thing.
2 Samuel 7:1-7 NASB
1

Now it came about when the king lived in his house, and the LORD had given him rest on every side from

all his enemies,

2

that the king said to Nathan the prophet, “See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark

of God dwells within tent curtains.”

3

Nathan said to the king, “Go, do all that is in your mind, for the LORD is

with you.”
4

But in the same night, the word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying,

5

“Go and say to my servant David,

‘Thus says the LORD, “ Are you the one who should build me a house to dwell in?

6

For I have not dwelt in a

house since the day I brought up the sons of Israel from Egypt, even to this day; but I have been moving
about in a tent, even in a tabernacle.

7

Wherever I have gone with all the sons of Israel, did I speak a word

with one of the tribes of Israel, which I commanded to shepherd my people Israel, saying, ‘ Why have you
not built me a house of cedar?’”’”
Genesis 28:10-22 is the founding story of the temple at Bethel, which will later become an idolatrous center of
worship for the estranged tribes of Israel and eventually lead to Israel’s destruction and exile.

Class Notes: Jacob

81 of 184

1 Kings 12:28-32 NASB
28

So the king consulted, and made two golden calves, and he said to them, “It is too much for you to go

up to Jerusalem; behold your gods, O Israel, that brought you up from the land of Egypt.”
29

He set one in Bethel, and the other he put in Dan.

30

Now this thing became a sin, for the people went to worship before the one as far as Dan.

31

And he made houses on high places, and made priests from among all the people who were not of the

sons of Levi.

32

Jeroboam instituted a feast in the eighth month on the fifteenth day of the month, like the

feast which is in Judah, and he went up to the altar; thus he did in Bethel, sacrificing to the calves which
he had made. And he stationed in Bethel the priests of the high places which he had made.
Amos 3:14 NASB
For on the day that I punish Israel’s transgressions, I will also punish the altars of Bethel; the horns of the
altar will be cut off and they will fall to the ground.
Amos 4:4-5 NIV
4

“ Go to Bethel and sin; go to Gilgal and sin yet more. Bring your sacrifices every morning, your tithes

every three years.

5

Burn leavened bread as a thank offering and brag about your freewill offerings—boast

about them, you Israelites, for this is what you love to do,” declares the Sovereign LORD.
Amos 5:5-6 NASB
5

But do not resort to Bethel and do not come to Gilgal, nor cross over to Beersheba;

for Gilgal will certainly go into captivity
and Bethel will come to trouble.
6

Seek the LORD that you may live,

or he will break forth like a fire,
O house of Joseph,
and it will consume with none to quench it for Bethel,

Bethel, the Son of Man, and Jesus
This story is alluded to in an important moment in the Gospel of John, where Jesus is assembling a symbolic
restored Israel.
John 1:44-51 NASB
44

Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.

45

Philip found Nathanael and said to

him, “We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and also the Prophets wrote—Jesus of Nazareth, the
son of Joseph.”

46

Nathanael said to him, “Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him,

“Come and see.”
47

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no

deceit!”
48

Nathanael said to him, “How do you know me?” Jesus answered and said to him, “Before Philip called

you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”

Class Notes: Jacob

82 of 184

49

Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the King of Israel.”

50

Jesus answered and said to him, “Because I said to you that I saw you under the fig tree, do you believe?

You will see greater things than these.”
51

And he said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will see the heavens opened and the angels of God

ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”
John here retells the story of Nathanael’s calling into the group of Jesus’ disciples. However, he has told the
story in order to portray Jesus as Yahweh, summoning a morally transformed (= new covenant) Yaaqov/Israel
to follow him.
Nathanael is presented as a renewed Israel, being summoned as a new Adam (from “under the tree”) to follow
Jesus into a new Eden (= a renewed and united Heaven and Earth).
The hyperlinks that John is activating show how the Yaaqov story was understood in relationship to the larger
themes about Yaaqov at work in the TaNaK.

Jesus and Nathanael

Yaaqov and the Prophets

John 1:47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him,

Gen. 27:35 But Yitskhaq said to Esau, “Your brother

and said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in

Jacob (Heb. yaaqov = “deceiver”) came with

whom there is no deceit !”

deceit (Heb. mirmah) and he has taken away your
blessing.”
Zeph. 3:12-13, 15 But I will leave among you
a humble and lowly people,
and they will take refuge in the name of the Lord.
The remnant of Israel will do no wrong
and tell no lies ,
nor will a tongue of

deceit (Heb. tarmit)

be found in their mouths;
for they will feed and lie down
with no one to make them afraid .
The King of Israel, the Lord, is in your midst ;
you will fear disaster no more.

John 1:48-49 Nathanael said to him, “How do you

Mic. 4:4 But they will sit, each man under his own

know me?” Jesus answered and said to him,

vine and under his own fig tree , and no one will

“Before Philip called you, when you were under

make them afraid

the fig tree , I saw you.” Nathanael answered him,
“Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the King

Zech. 3:8-10 “For behold, I am going to bring my

of Israel .”

servant, Branch … and I will remove the iniquity of
that land in one day. In that day,” declares the Lord
of hosts, “every one of you will invite his neighbor

Hyperlinks to the Jacob Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

83 of 184

Jesus and Nathanael

Yaaqov and the Prophets
to under his vine and under his fig tree .”
1 Kgs. 4:21, 25 Now Solomon ruled over all the
kingdoms ... So Judah and Israel lived in safety,
every man under his vine and his fig tree

Hyperlinks to the Jacob Story. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Reflection Question
How is Yaaqov’s vow to build God a house a parody of the vision God gave him?

Class Notes: Jacob

84 of 184

