Session 5: Jacob Tricks Esau

Key Takeaways
The Hebrew word tam means whole or complete and is used to describe people of moral integrity.
Describing Yaaqov as a “smooth man” has a double meaning: This contrasts his appearance with that of
his brother, but it also links his deceitful actions with a developing theme of tricksters and deceivers in
the Bible.
Yaaqov’s deception of Esau (Edom) replays the snake’s deception of Adam in the garden of Eden.

Yaaqov Tricks Esau the Firstborn

27 And the boys grew up,

and Esau was a man having knowledge of hunted-game (‫)ציד‬
a man of the field,
and Yaaqov was a man of wholeness (‫)תם‬,
a dweller of tents.
28 And Yitskhaq loved Esau ,

because hunted-game (‫ )ציד‬was in his mouth,
and Rivqah loved Yaaqov .

29 And Yaaqov stewed a stew (‫ )ויזד נזיד‬,

and Esau came in from the field,
and he was faint;
30 and Esau said to Yaaqov,

“Please let me swallow that red red, for I am faint.”
Therefore his name was called Edom / red (‫)אדום‬

31 And he said,

“ Today , sell me your firstborn-right (‫)בכרה‬.”
32 And Esau said,

“Look, I am going to die;
what is this (‫ )למה זה‬to me, a firstborn-right (‫”?)בכרה‬
33 And Yaaqov said,

“ Today , swear an oath to me,”
and so he swore an oath to him,
and he sold his firstborn-right (‫ )בכרה‬to Yaaqov.
34 And Yaaqov gave to Esau bread and stew (‫ )נזיד‬of lentil beans;

Class Notes: Jacob

29 of 184

and he ate and he drank
and he rose and he left,
and Esau despised his firstborn-right (‫)בכרה‬.

Genesis 25:27-34. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Esau the Animal Slayer
Esau is introduced as a hunter )‫(ציד ידע‬, a unique description that recalls an earlier generation of the nonchosen son: Ham, whose grandson was Nimrod, the founder of Babylon and Assyria.

Gen. 10:6
8

The sons of Ham; Cush ...

Now, Cush became the father of Nimrod ;

Gen. 25:27 Esau had knowledge
of hunting game )‫(ידע ציד‬

he began to be a mighty warrior in the land.
9

He was a mighty warrior-hunter )‫(גבור ציד‬

before Yahweh;

Gen. 25:30 Therefore his name is

therefore it is said,

called Edom

“Like Nimrod a mighty warrior-hunter
before Yahweh.”
10

And the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon and Erech and

Esau/Edom becomes the father of
the Edomites

Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
11

From that land he went forth into Assyria, and built Nineveh ...

Esau the Animal Slayer. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Let's compare Esau with Ham and Nimrod.
Ham and Esau are both the non-chosen sons.
Esau and Nimrod are both animal slayers, a sign of being outside of Eden and at odds with the animals
(see Gen. 9:1-5).
Esau and Nimrod are both the founding figures of nations that will later become hostile to the family of
Abraham: Babylon, Assyria, and Edom.
Nimrod was a “violent warrior” (Heb. gibbor / ‫(גבור‬, a term used elsewhere of the Nephilim, the violent
mutant offspring from the sons of elohim debacle in Gen. 6:1-4. While Esau himself is never called a
gibbor, he definitely acts like one! This sets up an analogy:
Nephilim/gibborim of the generation of the flood
Nimrod/gibbor of the generation of Babylon
Esau/gibbor-like of the generation of Yaaqov
Both the Nephilim and Nimrod are carried away in a flood of God’s judgment in the forms of
cosmic-flood (Gen. 6-8) and the scattering of an empire (Gen. 11). This leads us to assume that
Esau will also be associated with some coming form of divine judgment.

Yaaqov the “Whole Man”
Genesis 25:27 Instructor's Translation

Class Notes: Jacob

30 of 184

and Esau
was a man knowing hunted-game )‫(ציד‬
a man of the field,
and Yaaqov
was a man of wholeness )‫(תם‬,
a dweller of tents
Notice the parallel contrast set up between Esau and Yaaqov. On one level, it seems like a simple contrast:
Esau is an outdoorsman among the animals, while Yaaqov is more of a homebody.
The description of Yaaqov as “whole” is curious. When the word is used of people, it usually means “morally
blameless, whole in moral character.”
Job 1:1 NASB
There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job; and that man was blameless )‫(תם האיש‬, upright,
fearing God and turning away from evil.
Psalm 37:37 NIV
Consider the blameless )‫(תם‬, observe the upright; a future awaits those who seek peace.
Proverbs 29:10 NIV
The bloodthirsty hate the blameless )‫ (תם‬and seek to kill the upright.
The above passages are clear that to be “whole” is to be a morally upright person. But this word describes
Yaaqov in a story about how he cheats his brother!
This word is used in a purposefully ironic way to establish Yaaqov as an anti-Noah who doesn't trust God, but it
also matches a description of Yaaqov in the next deception story in Genesis 27:11.
Genesis 6:9 NASB
Noah was a righteous man morally-whole )‫ (תמים‬among his generation.
Genesis 25:27 NASB
Esau is a “man knowing hunted-game, a man of the field )‫ (שדה איש‬... "
Yaaqov is a “man of wholeness )‫(תם איש‬, a dweller in the tents”
Genesis 27:11 NASB
Look Esau my brother is a man of hair )‫(איש שער‬
but I am a man of smoothness )‫ (איש חלק‬.
These matching statements illuminate each other.
Esau’s “outdoorsman” nature matches his “hairy” body
Yaaqov's “wholeness” matches his “smooth” body
Not only that, but “smoothness” )‫ (חלק‬is a word often used to describe smooth-talkers and deceptive people.

Class Notes: Jacob

31 of 184

Psalm 12:2-3 NIV
2

Everyone lies to their neighbor; they have smooth lips but harbor deception in their hearts.

3

May the LORD silence all smooth lips and every boastful tongue—

Proverbs 5:3 NIV
For the lips of the adulterous woman drip honey, and her speech is smoother than oil;
Proverbs 26:28 NIV
A lying tongue hates those it hurts, and a mouth of smoothness works ruin.
Conclusion: Yaaqov's “wholeness” is a deliberately ironic way to describe his smooth skin and his deceptive
nature. It also marks him as anti-chosen, unlike Noah who actually was “morally whole” and marked for
deliverance from the flood.

Stealing the Firstborn-Right
In this famous story, Yaaqov decieves his hungry, bumbling oaf of a brother. The story contains many vivid
images that set up the tensions that will drive the rest of the Yaaqov story.

Plot Conflict Introduced

Plot Conflict Intensified

Plot Conflict Resolved

Gen. 25 Yaaqov deceives his brother

Gen. 27 Yaaqov deceives his father

Not resolved until

Esau of his firstborn-right

and brother of the firstborn’s

Genesis 33 and 37.

(bekorah).

blessing (berakah).

Yaaqov deceptively cheats to gain

Yaaqov deceptively cheats to gain

Not resolved until

what God said was already his: the

what God said would be his: the

Genesis 35.

position of firstborn .

blessing .

Stealing the Firstborn-Right. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The plot conflicts that begin in this story will generate the tension that spans the entire story of Yaaqov. This
story introduces us to the big question at the heart of the Yaaqov story.
What if God’s chosen one is so focused on self-gain and self-preservation that they constantly manipulate
others to get what God already promised to give them and others through them?
In many ways, this develops the theme that began in the creation narratives: God wants to bless humans and
all creation through them as they co-rule the world as God’s partners.
But what if the humans don’t trust God, so they take life and wisdom into their own hands in order to gain the
very things God already said he would give them: abundance, security, status, authority, and blessing?
This explains why this little episode is riddled with language and themes from Genesis 1-3.

Class Notes: Jacob

32 of 184

Genesis 1-4

Genesis 25-27

God creates “human” (Heb. ‘adam / ‫ )אדם‬and

The twins are born, and the name of the firstborn

installs him with the authority of the firstborn over

is “Edom” (‘edom / ‫)אדם‬.

creation, including the animals.

A non-chosen animal, the heel-striking snake,

The chosen brother, the heel-grabbing Yaaqov,

deceives ‘adam.

deceives ‘edom.

The deceived ‘adam takes and eats food that

The deceived ‘edom takes and eats food that

results in a loss of blessing and the onset of the

results in the loss of his firstborn right and his

curse.

blessing.

The non-chosen firstborn son, Cain, is a shepherd

The non-chosen firstborn son, Esau, is a man of the

in the field, and is angered by God’s favor on his

field and angered by Yaaqov’s deception of his

younger brother.

firstborn-right and blessing.

Echoes of Genesis 1-4 in Genesis 25-27. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Reflection Question
What do Yaaqov’s actions and the Bible’s description of him reveal about his attitude toward God’s promises?

Class Notes: Jacob

33 of 184

