Session 23: The Reunion of Jacob and Esau

Key Takeaways
After his wrestling match with God, Yaaqov, the wounded servant, sacrifices himself on behalf of
everything he holds dear.
Esau’s reaction to Yaaqov’s return, running to him and embracing him, points forward to Jesus’ parable
of the loving father embracing his prodigal son.
Yaaqov recognizes the image of God in Esau’s face, moving him to love his brother the way he would
love God.

Yaaqov Reconciles With Esau and Offers Up His Life

1 And Yaaqov lifted his eyes and saw ,

and behold, Esau was coming,
and with him were four hundred men,

and he divided the children
by Leah, and by Rakhel, and by the two servants .
2 And he placed the servants and their children first,

and Leah and her children afterwards,
and Rakhel and Joseph afterwards.
3 And he himself passed on before the face of them

and he bowed down to the ground seven times,
until he came near to his brother.

4 And Esau ran to meet him

and he embraced him and fell on his neck and kissed him,
and they wept.

5 And he [Esau] lifted his eyes and saw

the women and the children ,

and he said,
“ Who are these with you ?”
And he said,
“The children with whom God has favored (‫ )חנן‬your servant.”

Class Notes: Jacob

154 of 184

6 And the servants came near with their children , and they bowed down.
7 And Leah likewise came near with her children , and they bowed down;

and afterwards Joseph and Rakhel came near , and they bowed down.

8 And he said,

“ What is it to you , all this camp (‫ )מחנה‬that I have encountered?”
And he said,
“To find favor (‫ )חן‬in the eyes of my lord.”

9 And Esau said,

“ I have much, my brother ;
let what you have belong to you.”

10 And Yaaqov said,

“No, please, if now I have found favor (‫ )חן‬in your eyes,
then take my offering (‫ )מנחה‬from my hand,
for this reason:
I have seen your face as one sees the face of God ,
and you have accepted me.
11 Please take my blessing which has been brought to you,

because God has shown favor (‫ )חנן‬to me,
and because I have everything .”

And he urged him,
and he took it.

Genesis 33:1-17. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
The scene progresses in two parallel panels that create a fascinating comparison and contrast between the
two brothers.
Genesis 33:1-4 focuses on Yaaqov's perception (33:1), his response (33:1b-3) of placing the family
members in order of favor, and then placing himself in front of them all as he bows down to his brother.
This is a surprise shift from the previous day’s plan, where he places all the wives and children up front,
even though he knew their lives were at risk. This move to the front shows that Yaaqov has undergone a
deep character transformation.
The surprising twist (33:4) is that Esau runs to be reconciled with his brother, showing affection and
love. The inner contrast is between Yaaqov's self-preservation scheme and Esau’s generous love.
Genesis 33:5-8 unfolds with a parallel progression, this time opening with Esau’s perception (33:5) and
his response of astonishment at how many people and animals there are (33:5b-8).

Class Notes: Jacob

155 of 184

Notice how Genesis 33:5b-8 contains the progressive list of wives and children at the center, flanked by
two short dialogues between the brothers that portray the family as an expression of God’s “favor” that
Yaaqov uses to gain “favor” in the eyes of his brother.
The middle sub-unit in Genesis 33:9-11 shows Yaaqov back in his native mode of transactional selfpreservation as he attempts to give an “offering” to his brother. However, the concentric design of this unit
makes a more subtle point. Notice how Yaaqov calls the animals an offering )‫ (מנחה‬in 33:10, but then in the
matching line he asks his brother to “take” )‫“ (לקח‬the blessing” )‫(ברכה‬. Yaaqov's purpose becomes clear; this
“gift” is his attempt to undo his actions from chapter 27, where he took )‫ (לקח‬the blessing )‫ (ברכה‬from this
brother (Gen. 27:36).
This climactic scene sheds light on the previous narrative of Yaaqov at the Jabbok, where he wrestled with the
“God-man,” received a blessing, and “saw the face of God.” Now, faced with his brother from whom he stole
the blessing, we see that Yaaqov's struggle with his brother over the blessing is one and the same as his
struggle with God to gain the blessing. At the Jabbok, Yaaqov was wounded and humbled, and yet received
the blessing after all. So now Yaaqov gives up his struggle to usurp his brother, and he “gives up” the blessing,
only to receive it in a new and more powerful way.

Yaaqov, Ever the Schemer

12 And he said,

“ Let us journey (‫ )נסע‬and let us go,
and I will go before you.”
13 And he said to him,

“My lord knows that the children are tender
and the flocks and herds which are nursing are with me,
and should they drive them one day, all the flocks will die.
14 Please let my lord pass on before his servant ,

and I will proceed at my leisure,
according to the pace of the cattle that are before me
and according to the pace of the children ,
until I come to my lord at Seir.”

15 And Esau said,

“Please let me leave with you some of the people who are with me.”
And he said,
“What need is there?
Let me find favor in the eyes of my lord.”

16 And Esau returned that day on his way to Seir.

Class Notes: Jacob

156 of 184

17 And Yaaqov journeyed (‫ )נסע‬to Sukkoth [= “Booths”]

and he built for himself a house
and he made booths for his livestock;
therefore the name of the place is called Sukkoth.

Genesis 33:1-17. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
Here we see Yaaqov's evasive and scheming nature re-emerge. While he clearly wants to be reconciled to his
brother, we now wonder about his ultimate motives. Perhaps what he really wants is simply to live in the land
of his birth and ancestors, and making peace with Esau is a necessary step. Every response of Yaaqov sounds
like a lame excuse. Esau wants to live together, but Yaaqov lets the "weakness" of the flocks and children pose
the obstacle (much like he placed the animals and children in front of himself as a human shield in chapter 32
).
At the culmination of his excuses, Yaaqov simply lies outright and says he will follow Esau to Seir. He has no
intention of doing this, and his actions tell the real story. As soon as Yaaqov and Esau are reunited, Yaaqov
tries to get his brother out of his hair and territory. Yaaqov is on a mission to get back into the land and be near
his father.

Reflection Question
What does it mean when Yaaqov says to Esau, “I have seen your face as one sees the face of God”? Where else
do we see this theme in the Bible?

Class Notes: Jacob

157 of 184

