Session 15: God Sees Leah

Key Takeaways
The combined language of “love” and “hate” makes its first appearance here talking about Rakhel and
Leah, but it gets picked up by later biblical authors to talk about outcomes for entire groups of people.
Levi and Judah, the third and fourth sons of the unloved wife, become the fathers of the future anointed
leaders of Israel.
Time and time again, God reveals his heart by elevating the poor and oppressed and treating them as
kings and queens.

Yaaqov's Rival Wives and Many Sons
Genesis 29:31-35
Yahweh sees the unloved Leah and gives her 4 sons

Genesis 30:1-16

• 30:1-8 Rival Sisters / Failure: Round 1
• Rakhel is jealous of Leah and gives her slave to Yaaqov > 2 sons
• 30:9-13 Rival Sisters / Failure: Round 2
• Leah is jealous of Rakhel and gives her slave to Yaaqov > 2 sons
• 30:14-16 Rival Sisters / Failure: Round 3
• Rakhel hires out Yaaqov for a night in exchange for mandrakes
Genesis 30:17-24
30:17-21 Yahweh hears the unloved Leah and gives her 2 sons + 1 daughter
30:22-24 Yahweh remembers and hears younger Rakhel and gives her 1 son

Genesis 29:31-30:24. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The birth narrative of the many sons of Yaaqov is set within the rivalry of Leah and Rakhel, whose sins against
each other mirror that rivalry of Yaaqov and Esau.
The narrative opens and closes with God noticing the despondent state of each sister (“and God saw ...” and
“God remembered ... and listened ...”), followed by the surprise pregnancy and birth of children (Leah’s first
four and Rakhel’s one).

Class Notes: Jacob

98 of 184

Inside of this “divine gift” frame, there are three failure narratives of the sisters scheming to generate their own
blessing, each one patterned after earlier narratives about Abraham, Sarah, and Hagar, or about Yaaqov and
Esau.
Genesis 30:1-7 portrays Rakhel as jealous of her fertile sister, and so she replays the sin of Abraham and
Sarah against Hagar. But God responds with the blessing of children.
Genesis 30:9-13 portrays Leah as imitating her sister in repeating the sins of Abraham and Sarah against
Hagar, and again the divine response is the blessing of more children.
Genesis 30:14-21 combines the rival sisters in a single narrative, so that the discovery of the mandrakes
(a cipher for "Edom") becomes the occasion for Leah (the older) to "buy" the blessing of children from
her sister Rakhel. In this story, Leah becomes Yaaqov, while Rakhel becomes Esau, trading away her
husband for mandrakes.

Yahweh Blesses the Non-Chosen

31 And Yahweh saw that Leah was hated ,

and he opened her womb ,
but Rakhel was barren.

Leah's 4 Sons

#1 Reuben
32 And Leah became pregnant and gave birth to a son,

and she called his name Reuben , (‫)ראובן‬
for she said,
“ Because Yahweh has seen

(‫ )ראה‬my oppression,

for now my husband will love me.”

#2 Shimon
33 And Leah became pregnant again and gave birth to a son,

and she said,
“ Because Yahweh has heard

(‫ )שמע‬that I was hated ,

and he has also given me this one,”
and she called his name Shimon . (‫)שמעון‬

#3 Levi
34 And she became pregnant again and gave birth to a son,

and she said,
“Now, this time my husband will be attached

(‫ )ילוה‬to me,

because I have borne him three sons.”
Therefore
his name was called Levi . (‫)לוי‬
#4 Yehudah

Class Notes: Jacob

99 of 184

35 And she got pregnant again and gave birth to a son,

and she said,
“ This time I will praise

(‫ )אודה‬Yahweh.”

Therefore she called his name Yehudah . (‫)יהודה‬

And she stopped giving birth .

Genesis 29:31-35. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
In this opening scene, Leah is set on analogy with Hagar, the non-chosen wife of Abraham who is still blessed
and given a promise of future seed.
Genesis 16:11-13 NASB*
11

And the messenger of Yahweh said to [Hagar], “Look, you are pregnant and will give birth to a son, and

you will call his name Yishmael (= “El will hear”) because Yahweh has heard your oppression.
12

And as for him, he will be a donkey of a human. His hand will be against everyone, and everyone’s hand

will be against him. And against the face of all his brothers he will reside.”

13

And she called the name of

Yahweh who spoke to her, “You are El-Roi (= “El Who Sees Me”)”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Genesis 21:17-18 NASB
17

And Elohim heard the voice of the young one, and the messenger of Elohim called to Hagar from the

skies, and he said to her,
“What is it, Hagar? Don’t be afraid, because Elohim has heard the voice of the young one, in the place
where he is.
18

Get up, pick up the young one, and take him with your hand, because I will make him a nation, a great

one.”
In the story of Abraham, Hagar and Ishmael are the non-chosen, but they are favored by Abraham. Their
expulsion is a result of Sarah’s jealousy (Gen. 21), so God cares for the non-chosen and also gives Eden
blessing to them.
Here in the Yaaqov story, Leah is unloved, so God also blesses her with abundant seed.

The Ancestors of the Messiahs
This story is remarkable as it makes up the center of the center of the Yaaqov story, and it features the birth of
the two sons who will become the ancestors of Israel’s two “anointed” institutions: the priesthood and the
kingship.
Levi is the ancestor of Aaron (see Exod. 6:12-28), who will be Israel’s first “anointed” high priest (see
Exod. 29:7; Lev. 8:12).
Judah is the ancestor of David, who will be Israel’s first king to unite the tribes into one people (see
1 Sam. 16, 2 Sam. 4-5).

Class Notes: Jacob

100 of 184

Rakhel’s Scheme to Build a Family
Rakhel's 2 Sons Through Her Slave
1 And Rakhel saw that she had not given birth for Yaaqov,

and she became jealous of her sister;
and she said to Yaaqov,
“Give me sons!
And if not,
I’m going to die!”

2 And Yaaqov's anger was hot against Rakhel,

and he said,
“Am I in the place of Elohim,
who has withheld from you the fruit of the womb?”
3 And she said,

“Here is my servant Bilhah.
Go in to her,
so she can give birth onto my knees,
and from her I also will be built up.”

4 And she gave to him her servant Bilhah as a wife ,

and Yaaqov went in to her.

#5 Dan
5 And Bilhah conceived and birthed for Yaaqov a son,
6 and Rakhel said,

“God has vindicated me (‫)דנני‬,
and also has heard my voice,
and has given me a son.”
Therefore she called his name Dan

(‫)דן‬.

#6 Naphtali
7 And Rakhel's servant Bilhah conceived again and birthed for Yaaqov

a second son .

8 And Rakhel said,

“ Wrestlings

(‫ )נפתולי‬of Elohim

I have wrestled

(‫ )נפתלתי‬with my sister,

and I have prevailed!”
And she called his name Naphtali

(‫)נפתלי‬.

Leah's 2 Sons Through Her Slave

Class Notes: Jacob

101 of 184

9 And Leah saw that she had stopped giving birth ,

and she took her servant Zilpah ,
and she gave her to Yaaqov as a wife .

#7 Gad
10 And Leah’s servant Zilpah birthed for Yaaqov a son,
11 and Leah said,

“By Fortune

(‫”!)בגד‬

and she called his name Gad

(‫)גד‬.

#8 Asher
12 And Leah’s servant Zilpah birthed for Yaaqov

a second son ,

13 and Leah said,

“By my blessing

(‫!)באשרי‬

For women will call me blessed

(‫)אשרוני‬.”

And she called his name Asher

(‫)אשר‬.

Genesis 30:1-13. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
Sarah didn't trust in Yahweh to provide her with a child. Rakhel is also unable to have children and comes up
with the same scheme as Sarah.
Genesis 3:6 Instructor's Translation
And the woman )‫ (האשה‬saw )‫ (ותרא‬that the tree was good for eating ... and she took )‫ (ותקח‬from its fruit and
she ate and she gave )‫ (ותתן‬also to her husband )‫ (אישה‬with her and he ate.

Sarah and Hagar

Rakhel and Bilhah

Gen. 16:1 And Sarai … had not given birth for

Gen. 30:1 And Rachel saw )‫ (ותרא‬that she had not

Abram

given birth for Jacob and she was jealous of her
sister

Gen. 16:2 And Sarai said… “Behold )‫(הנה‬, Yahweh

Gen. 30:2 And Jacob said, “Am I in the place of

has bound me from giving birth. Please go into my

God who has withheld from you the fruit of the

slave )‫(שפחה‬. Perhaps I can be built up from her

womb?”

)‫ מן‬+ ‫(בנה‬.” And Abram listened to her voice
) ‫ לקול‬+ ‫( שמע‬.

Gen. 30:3 “Behold )‫(הנה‬, my maid-slave )‫(אמתי‬
Bilhah, go into her and she will give birth upon my
knees, and I will be built up, me too, from her

)‫ מן‬+ ‫”(בנה‬
Replaying Genesis 16. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

102 of 184

Sarah and Hagar

Rakhel and Bilhah

Gen. 16:3-4 And Sarai took … her slave )‫(שפחה‬,

Gen. 30:4 And she gave to him )‫ (ותתן לו‬Bilhah her

and she gave her to )‫ (ותתן ל‬Abram as a wife

slave )‫ (שפחה‬as a wife )‫ (לאשה‬and he went into her.

)‫(לאשה‬. And he went into her …
Gen. 16:4 And [Hagar] became pregnant and

Gen. 30:5 And [Bilhah] became pregnant

when she saw )‫ (ותרא‬she was pregnant, her
mistress was cursed in her eyes.

Gen. 16:11 “Behold you are pregnant, and you will

Gen. 30:6 And Rachel said “God has judged for

bear a son and call his name Yishmael )‫(ישמעאל‬

me and also he has listened

for Yahweh has listened )‫ (שמע‬to your suffering.”

) ‫ בקול‬+ ‫ ( שמע‬...”

Gen. 16:12-14 Hagar discovers at “Ber- lahai -roi”

Gen. 30:5 Bilhah gives birth to Dan

to my voice

)‫ (באר לחי ראי‬that she will give birth to Ishmael,
who will be a “ wild donkey of a man” )‫( פרא אדם‬,
and his hand )‫ (ידו‬will be against everyone.”

Judg. 15:14-16 The most famous “Danite” is
Samson, who “came to Lehi )‫ (לחי‬, and he found
the jawbone )‫ (לחי‬of a donkey and he sent out
his hand )‫ (ידו‬and he struck with it a thousand
men.”

Replaying Genesis 16. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Rakhel’s actions with Yaaqov are an intensified replay of Sarah’s actions with Abraham, as well as a contrast
with Rivqah from Genesis 25:21.
Sarai is barren and schemes her own way to produce the promised seed, accusing Abraham when the
plan doesn’t work.
Rivqah is barren, but Yitzhaq intercedes for her, and Yahweh restores fertility to her womb.
Rakhel is barren, accuses her husband for not giving her sons, and then schemes her own way (identical
to Sarah’s) to produce seed.

Of Mandrakes and Bowls of Stew

14 And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest,

and he found mandrakes

in the field ,

and brought them to his mother Leah.

And Rakhel said to Leah,
“Please give me some of your son’s mandrakes .”

Class Notes: Jacob

103 of 184

15 And she said to her,

“Is it a small matter for you to take my husband?
And would you also take my son’s mandrakes ?!”
And Rakhel said,
“Therefore, he can lay with you this night,
in the place of your son’s mandrakes .”

16 And Yaaqov came in from the field in the evening,

and Leah went out to meet him
and she said,
“You must come in to me,
for I have surely paid a wage (‫ )שכר‬for you,
with my son’s mandrakes .”
And he lay with her that night.

Leah's 2 Sons + 1 Daughter

#9 Yissakhar
17 And Yahweh listened to Leah ,

and she became pregnant and gave birth to a fifth son,
18 and Leah said,

“Yahweh has given my wage (‫ )שכרי‬,
in that I gave my female slave to my husband.”
And she called his name Yissakhar (‫ )יששכר‬.

#10 Zebulun
19 And Leah became pregnant again and gave birth to a sixth son to Yaaqov,
20 and Leah said,

“Yahweh has gifted me (‫ )זבדני‬with a good gift

(‫)זבד‬.

This time my husband will exalt me (‫)יזבלני‬,
because I have birthed six sons for him.”
And she called his name Zebulun

(‫)זבלון‬.

#11 Dinah
21 And afterward she gave birth to a daughter,

and she called her name Dinah .

Rakhel's 1 Son

#12 Yoseph
22 And Elohim remembered Rakhel ,

Class Notes: Jacob

104 of 184

and Elohim listened to her ,
and he opened her womb ,
23 and she conceived and gave birth to a son,

and she said,
“God has gathered away

(‫ )אסף‬my humiliation.”

24 And she called his name Yoseph

(‫)יוסף‬,

saying,
“May Yahweh add (‫ )יסף‬to me another son.”

Genesis 30:14-24. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
The mandrake episode (Gen. 30:14-16) is a condensed replay (and elaborate wordplay!) of Yaaqov's deception
of Esau with the red stew and of Lavan’s deceit concerning Yaaqov's “wages.” It also develops the themes of
Genesis 3, where the sought-after blessing is exchanged for food.

Yaaqov’s Deceptions and Lavan’s
Counter-Deceptions

Leah “Hires” Yaaqov for a Night

Yaaqov used stew to deceptively take the

Leah used mandrakes to deceptively take the promised

birthright from Esau

seed from Rakhel

Gen. 25:29 Esau was coming in “from the

Gen. 30:14, 16 Reuben found mandrakes “in the field”, and

field” when Yaaqov tricked him with the

Leah tricked Rakhel and found Yaaqov when he came in

stew

“from the field”

The stew is “red red” (ha’adom ha’adom /

The mandrakes (duda’im / ‫(דודאים‬

‫(האדם האדם‬
Gen. 29:15 Lavan cheats Yaaqov out of his

Gen. 30:16 Leah “hires by wage“ )‫ (שכר‬Yaaqov for a night

“wages” )‫(שכר‬

Of Mandrakes and Bowls of Stew. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Leah the older sibling usurps the younger, chosen sibling with exotic food (wordplays with Edom from Gen. 25
).
“Hebrew dudaʾim has long been identified with the Mandragora, officinarum, which grows wild in the fields.
Its small, yellow, tomato-like fruit ripens during March and April. Chemical analysis shows it to contain
emetic, purgative, and narcotic substances, which explains its widespread medicinal use in ancient times.
Because the fruit exudes a distinctive and heady fragrance, and its sturdy, forked or intertwined root has
torso-like features, the mandrake appears as a widely diffused folkloristic motif associated with aphrodisiac
powers. Aphrodite, the Greek goddess of love, beauty, and sex, was given the epithet 'hē mandragoriti,'
'Lady of the Mandrake.' The Hebrew term dudaʾim is close in sound to dodim, 'love.' Indeed, the two are
associated in the Song of Songs: 'There I will give my love (dodai) to you. / The mandrakes (dudaʾim) yield
their fragrance ... my beloved (dodi)' (7:13–14).”

Class Notes: Jacob

105 of 184

Sarna, Nahum M. (2001). Genesis. JPS. 209.

God Remembered Noah ... And Rakhel
Up to this point in the Genesis scroll, God has only remembered two other people: Noah and those with him,
sitting in the ark waiting for the dry land to appear, and Abraham, who interceded on behalf of Lot sitting in
Sodom.

Noah

Abraham

Rachel

Gen. 8:1

Gen. 19:29

Gen. 30:22-23

And Elohim remembered

And it came about when Yahweh

And Yahweh remembered

Noakh

caused the ruin of the cities of

Rakhel ,

and all the living creatures

the valley,

and he listened to her,

and all the beasts that were

that he remembered

and he opened her womb,

with him in the ark,

Avraham ,

and she conceived and gave

and Elohim caused a Spirit/wind

and he sent Lot out from the

birth to a son,

to pass over the land,
and the waters subsided.

middle of the overturning,
when he overturned the cities,
in which Lot had been
dwelling.

God Remembered Noakh and Rakhel. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

In all three stories, the characters are in situations where they are not able save or create life on their own
initiative. But in each case, the chosen one becomes the object of Yahweh’s mercy, and their plight gains his
attention.

Reflection Question
What does Genesis 29:31-35 show us about God’s heart for people?

Class Notes: Jacob

106 of 184

