Session 17: Jacob Deceives His Deceiver

Key Takeaways
Yaaqov and Lavan each try to gain the upper hand over the other. As their wealth increases, so does the
tension between them.
A likely explanation for Yaaqov’s use of the rods with the sheep is that they act as artificial mating
partners to control which rams are able to successfully mate.
Yaaqov’s use of animal disguises fits a developing pattern of deceit in Genesis.

Lavan the Snake Curses To Get the Blessing

25 And it came about when Rakhel had borne Joseph,

and Yaaqov said to Lavan,
“Send me away,
that I may go to my own place and to my own land.
26 Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served you, that I may go,

for you yourself know my service which I have served you.”

27 And Lavan said to him,

“If I have found favor in your eyes,
I have learned by divination
that Yahweh has blessed me on account of you.”
28 And he said,

“Name me your wages ,
and I will give it .”

29 And he said to him,

“You yourself know how I have served you
and how your cattle have been with me,
30 for you had little before I came

and it has broken out to a multitude,
and Yahweh has blessed you at my foot.
And now, when may I act for my own household also?”

Genesis 30:25-30. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

109 of 184

Now that Yaaqov has worked as Lavan’s slave for 14 years, we learn that Lavan has consulted his gods through
divination and learned something true: All abundance and fruitfulness is a gift of Yahweh, the Elohim of
Yaaqov.
Importantly, Lavan reveals just how he came by this knowledge.
Genesis 30:27 NASB
I have learned by divination (Heb. nakhash / ‫ (נחש‬that Yahweh has blessed me on account of you.
The word for “knowledge gained by divination” (nakhash) is spelled with the same three letters (= is a
homonym) as the Hebrew word for snake (nakhash)!
Lavan’s household flourishes under Yaaqov's care, and Lavan knows its true source. Will Lavan let his golden
boy go home?

The Nations and the Blessing
Notice this portrait of Lavan’s desire to benefit from Yaaqov's blessing and how it contrasts with Yaaqov's
father Yitskhaq and grandfather Abraham. This all began with the programmatic statement that God made to
Abraham, and was then repeated to Yaaqov by Yitskhaq.
Genesis 12:3 NASB
And I will

bless

those who

and the one who treats you as

bless

you,

cursed )‫(מקלל‬

I will

curse )‫(ארר‬.

And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.
Genesis 27:29 NASB
May peoples serve you,
and may people groups bow down to you,
be a mighty one to your brothers,
and may the sons of your mother bow down to you.
Cursed )‫(ארר‬
and those who

are those who
blessed

curse )‫(ארר‬

you are

you,

blessed.

Abraham and Avimelek

Yitskhaq and Avimelek

Jacob and Laban

Gen. 20 Abraham deceives

Gen. 26 Yitskhaq deceives

Gen. 29 Laban deceives Jacob

Avimelek regarding Sarah his

Avimelek regarding his wife

regarding his daughter

Gen. 21:22-34 Avimelek comes

Gen. 26:14-16 The Philistines are

Gen. 30:27-28 And Laban said

to Abraham in peace

envious of Jacob, so Avimelek

to Jacob,

wife

Patriarchal Promises in Genesis. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

110 of 184

Abraham and Avimelek

“ I see that Elohim is with you in

Yitskhaq and Avimelek

Jacob and Laban

says, “Go away from us, for you

“If I have found favor in your

are too powerful! ”

eyes, I have learned by

all that you are doing . Now,

divination that Yahweh has

swear an oath to me by Elohim

Gen. 26:28 But later he comes

blessed me on account of you .

…”

back to Yitskhaq and says, “ We

… Now then, mark your wages

see that Yahweh has been with

and I will give it.”

you , and we said
‘Let there now be an oath
between us, between you and
us,

and let us make a

covenant with you! ’”

Patriarchal Promises in Genesis. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Notice the variety of responses.
Abimelech with Abraham: Positive recognition of Yahweh’s blessing > desire for a covenant
Abimelech with Yitskhaq: Negative reaction, followed by a positive recognition of Yahweh’s blessing >
desire for covenant
Lavan with Yaaqov: Seemingly positive recognition of Yahweh’s blessing > no desire for a covenant, but
instead negotiation about a deal: “Mark your wages.”
The phrase “mark your wages” uses an uncommon Hebrew word: noqbah / ‫נקבה‬, from the root naqab / ‫נקב‬,
which means “to pierce, mark.”
This root (naqab) is a by-form (a homonym) of another Hebrew root, qabab / ‫קבב‬, and both mean “to
mark for a curse.” (See Lev. 24:11, 16; Job 3:8; Prov. 11:26 where it is spelled yiqqob / ‫יקב‬, ironically the
main letters of Yaaqov's name ‫)!יעקב‬
This root )‫ קבב‬often spelled ‫יקב‬, which looks like how ‫ נקב‬is spelled when it means “marked as cursed”)
is one of the main Hebrew words for “curse” )‫ (קבב‬that is used in the Balaam narratives in
Numbers 22-24. And low and behold, it shows a remarkable number of hyperlinks with the stories of
Yitskhaq and Abimelech and Yaaqov and Lavan!
Numbers 22:5-6, 11, 17 NASB*
5

So [the king of Moab] sent messengers to Balaam the son of Beor, at Pethor, which is near the River, in the

land of the sons of his people, to call him, saying, “Behold, a people came out of Egypt; behold, they cover
the surface of the land, and they are living opposite me.

6

Now, therefore, please come, curse )‫ (ארר‬this

people for me since they are too powerful for me; perhaps I may be able to defeat them and drive them
out of the land. For I know that he whom you

bless

is

blessed , and he whom you

curse )‫(ארר‬

is

cursed )‫ (ארר‬.”
11

“Behold, there is a people who came out of Egypt and they cover the surface of the land; now come,

curse )‫ (קבב‬them for me; perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them out.”

Class Notes: Jacob

111 of 184

17

“for I will indeed honor you richly, and I will do whatever you say to me. Please come then, curse )‫(קבב‬

this people for me.”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Numbers 23:7-8, 11, 25-26 NASB*
7

He took up his discourse and said, “From Aram Balak has brought me, Moab’s king from the mountains of

the East, ‘Come curse )‫ (ארר‬Yaaqov for me, And come, denounce Israel!’

8

How shall I curse )‫ (קבב‬whom

God has not cursed )‫ ?(קבב‬...”
11

Then Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? I took you to curse )‫ (קבב‬my enemies, but

behold, you have actually blessed them!”
25

Then Balak said to Balaam, “Do not curse )‫ (קב לא תקבנו‬them at all nor bless them at all!”

26

But Balaam

replied to Balak, “Did I not tell you, ‘Whatever the Lord speaks, that I must do’?”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

Numbers 24:9-10 NASB*
9

“He couches, he lies down as a lion, and as a lion, who dares rouse him? Blessed

blesses

you, and

cursed )‫(ארר‬

is everyone who

curses )‫ (ארר‬you.”

10

is everyone who

Then Balak’s anger burned

against Balaam, and he struck his hands together; and Balak said to Balaam, “I called you to curse )‫(קבב‬
my enemies, but behold, you have persisted in blessing them these three times!”
*Key Words Adapted by Teacher

These narratives lay out a program, a foundational statement, for the role of God’s chosen, blessed one among
the nations. Some nations quickly recognize God’s chosen ones and enter into the covenant and discover
God's blessing: Eshkol and Aner the Canaanites (Gen. 14), Abimelech (Gen. 21 and 26). Others don’t care and
oppress God’s chosen ones (Pharaoh in Exod. 1, Balak king of Moab in Num. 22-24).
Others take a while to come around, like Abimelech in Genesis 26 and Lavan in Genesis 30. Abimelech wants
to reject God’s chosen one but eventually comes around. Lavan wants to mooch off of the blessing of Yaaqov
but finds himself deceived and cheated just as he did to Yaaqov!

Paragraph 2: Genesis 30:31-36

31 And he said,

“What shall I give you?”
And Yaaqov said,
“You will not give me anything.
If you will do this thing for me,
I will again shepherd and keep your flock:

32 Let me pass through your entire flock today ,

Class Notes: Jacob

112 of 184

removing from there
every speckled and spotted lamb
and every dark one among the male-sheep
and the spotted and speckled among the she-goats;
and it shall be my wage.
33 And my righteousness will answer for me on a following day ,

when you go over my wage before you,
every one that is not speckled and spotted among the she-goats
and dark among the male-sheep with me,
will be considered stolen.”

34 And Lavan said,

“Behold, let it be according to your word.”

35 And he [= Lavan] removed on that day

the striped and spotted male goats
and all the speckled and spotted female goats,
every one with white [= laban] in it,
and all the black ones among the sheep,
and gave them into the care of his sons.

36 And he put a journey of three days between himself and Yaaqov,

and as for Yaaqov, he shepherded the rest of Lavan’s flocks.

Genesis 30:31-36. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Paragraph 3: Genesis 30:37-43

37 And Yaaqov took rods of poplar [=lebenah] ,

fresh, as well as almond and plane,
and he peeled

white (laban) stripes in them,

exposing the white (laban) on the rods.

38 And he placed the rods which he had peeled

by the troughs ,
by the water-troughs where the flocks came to drink,
in front of the flock,
and they mated when they came to drink.

39 And the flocks mated with/upon the rods,

and the flocks gave birth to striped , speckled , and spotted .

Class Notes: Jacob

113 of 184

40 And the lambs Yaaqov separated,

and he made the flocks face toward the striped and all the black in the flock of Lavan ;
and he placed his own herds apart,
and he did not place them with Lavan’s flock.

41 And it came about in all the mating of the strong ones of the flock,

Yaaqov would place the rods
in the sight of the flock
in the troughs ,
so that they would mate with the rods;
42 and when the flock was weak ,

he did not place them
and the weak ones belonged to Lavan
and the strong ones belonged to Yaaqov.

43 And the man broke out very much,

and there belonged to him many flocks,
and female and male servants,
and camels and donkeys.

Genesis 30:37-43. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Of Speckled Sheep and Mating Rods
This story is a detailed explanation of how Yaaqov eventually gets the upper hand over his deceptive uncle. He
puts himself in what seems to be a vulnerable situation, but then he uses an ancient animal breeding trick to
produce a large flock for himself. However, exactly what Yaaqov does with his flocks is a matter of debate
among scholars because the story's vocabulary and narrative are difficult to understand.
For the discussion that follows, see Scott Noegel's “Sex, Sticks, and Tricksters in Genesis 30:31-43: A New
Look at an Old Crux” in Journal of the Ancient Near Eastern Society, vol. 25 (1997), p. 7-17.
A common explanation says Yaaqov uses the rods mentioned Gen. 30:37-42 in either a superstitious ritual or
as an aphrodisiac to incite the mating of the correctly colored animals.
“[Jacob acts] on the common belief that a vivid sight during pregnancy or conception would leave its mark
on the embryo.”
Kidner, Derek (2008). Genesis (Tyndale Old Testament Commentaries). IVP Academic. 163.
There are two main problems with this explanation.
1. All evidence of this strange belief in Jewish culture dates to the 5th century A.D. and later—over 1,500
years later than the time of Yaaqov!

Class Notes: Jacob

114 of 184

2. If the sticks were some kind of aphrodisiac, this does not explain why he places the rods out when the
“strong ones” of Lavan’s flock were mating (30:41-42.) If they induce mating and fertility, we would
expect the opposite.
The more likely explanation says the sticks were placed as “false mating partners.”
Genesis 30:39 says in Hebrew that “the flock mated against/upon the rods )‫(אל המקלות‬.”
Genesis 30:41 says in Hebrew “the flock mated with the rods )‫(במקלות‬.”
“[T]he passage depicts Jacob employing the poplar rods not as a fertility symbol or aphrodisiac, but rather
as a type of ‘fake phallus.’ That is, Jacob allowed only the animals which he did not want to sire offspring to
‘become heated upon the rods.’ Herders and veterinarians acquainted with the breeding patterns of sheep
and goats are well-aware that while female lambs are in heat, they are often inclined to rub their genitals on
trees or sticks ... Like Jacob in Gen. 30:40, animal breeders often employ artificial mating devices along
with ‘teaser animals,’ i.e., males introduced into the flock to induce the females into early heat. This practice
is precisely what Jacob exploits in Gen. 30:39-41.”
Noegel, Scott B. (1997). "Sex, Sticks, and the Trickster in Gen. 30:31-43: A New Look at an Old Crux." Journal
of Ancient Near Eastern Society, vol. 25. 10.
The sequence of the narrative, while difficult to follow, makes more sense once we see that the rods function
as artificial mating devices.
1. In Genesis 30:32, Yaaqov requests that his wages consist of: (a) “every speckled and spotted lamb,” (b)
“every dark among the male-lambs,” and (c) “every spotted and speckled she-goat.”
Later in the narrative, we learn that some of Yaaqov's own flocks are already oddly colored
(30:40). Here, Yaaqov proposes that the oddly colored ones among Lavan’s flock will belong to
himself.
Yaaqov's named wage still leaves among Lavan’s flock (a & b) the speckled, spotted, and dark
female lambs (“ewes”), and (c) all the spotted and speckled male-goats.
2. In Gen. 30:35, Lavan removes from his own flock (not from Yaaqov's, see 30:40) all the goats that might
produce speckled, spotted, and dark young for Yaaqov. This includes: (a) striped and spotted he-goats,
(b) speckled and spotted she-goats, (c) every goat with white on it, and (d) every dark sheep.
3. In Genesis 30:36, Lavan puts the distance of three days between his own flocks and Yaaqov who is now
caring for Yaaqov's flock. This is Lavan’s newest attempt to cheat Yaaqov. He is removing the animals
that would, under natural circumstances, be used for breeding the animals that Yaaqov has named as
his wages.
4. In Genesis 30:37, Yaaqov creates mating sticks out of three kinds of aromatic trees (poplar, almond,
plane), which exude a milky substance when peeled. Notice the wordplay and intentional irony: The
sticks which Yaaqov uses to cheat Lavan )‫ (לבן‬are themselves the color of “white” (= Hebrew Lavan / ‫(לבן‬.
5. In Genesis 30:38, Yaaqov places the sticks “by/on the rehatim )‫(רהטים‬, by the watering troughs where
the females of the flock came to drink, facing the flock, and they mated when the females came to
drink.”
Given the make up of the flock left to Yaaqov in 30:35, the only female animals this can refer to
are the speckled and spotted female lambs and the striped and dark she-goats.
The rare noun rehatim could mean “trough” (as in Exod. 2:16), but a cognate noun is also used in
Song of Songs 7:6 to describe flowing hair, which could make good sense here: it would mean

Class Notes: Jacob

115 of 184

that Yaaqov is creating fake male sheep and goats with “rods” to mate with that will produce no
offspring.
6. In Genesis 30:39, we’re told that the flocks mate “against/upon the rods” and “the flocks bore striped,
speckled, and spotted.” Since the animals give birth to striped, speckled, and spotted young, the
animals that mated on the poplar rods must have been Lavan’s dark she-goats. They, of course, did not
bear any offspring. Conversely, only the few speckled and spotted female lambs, and the striped goats
that were not placed near the rods, bring forth young. From these, Yaaqov takes for himself the spotted
and speckled female lambs and he-goats (as he said in Gen. 30:32).
7. In Genesis 30:40, Yaaqov separates the speckled and spotted sheep that belong to him, and “made
them face the striped and all the dark ones in the flock of Lavan.” That is, he uses his female lambs and
mates them with Lavan’s male lambs of the same color. He exploits Lavan’s striped and dark sheep to
produce his own wages.
8. In Genesis 30:41-42, Yaaqov distinguishes among Lavan’s flock between the sheep that breed early (“the
strong”) and those that breed late (“the weak”), and he allows only the strong to mate against the rods,
thus producing no young. However, when his own flocks were drinking (as 30:42 implies) Yaaqov did
not set out the rods, so that “the weak ones belong to Lavan and the strong ones to Yaaqov.”
Conclusion: Yaaqov uses a subtle, deceptive technique to make sure his own animals multiply while Lavan’s
slowly dwindle.

Yaaqov Among the Deceivers in Genesis
Yaaqov's use of “animal disguises” and perhaps even “flowing hair” (the rehotim in Gen. 30:38, 41) fits into a
larger motif in the Genesis scroll, where characters use “animal deceptions” to accomplish their plans.
The animal skin used by Yaaqov to impersonate Esau (Gen. 27:16).
The goat’s blood smeared on the coat by Joseph’s brothers (Gen. 37:31).
Tamar, who gets Judah to promise her a young goat so she can rescue the promised lineage by sleeping
with her father-in-law (Gen. 38:17, 23).
Yaaqov's “mating rods” also connect to Leah’s “mandrakes” in the previous literary unit. Both are “fertile items
of irony.”
“The mandrakes are eaten by the barren Rachel, but it is Leah who conceives. The rods perform a similar
function. They are meant to inspire Laban’s herds to copulate, but to no effect ... Jacob's manipulation of
Laban’s flocks also mirrors Laban’s deception of Jacob in 29:21-30. Just as Laban deceives Jacob in
receiving the older Leah (lit. ‘Calf’) instead of younger Rachel (lit. ‘Female Lamb’) as a wife, so now it is the
‘stronger’ of Laban’s flocks which Jacob places before the impotent rods.”
Noegel, Scott B. (1997). "Sex, Sticks, and the Trickster in Gen. 30:31-43: A New Look at an Old Crux." Journal
of Ancient Near Eastern Society, vol. 25. 14-15.
Lavan’s deception of Yaaqov and Yaaqov's counter-deception aimed at acquiring many goats and sheep stand
in contrast to Abraham, who trusted Yahweh to provide the “lamb” as a substitute in the 'aqedah of Genesis 22
. In that story, the animal stands in the place of the human Yitskhaq.

Class Notes: Jacob

116 of 184

Lavan removes all the striped )‫ (עקד‬sheep )‫ (שה‬and goats (Gen. 30:32, 35, 39, 40; 31:8, 10). This is the
only appearance of this rare Hebrew root word in Genesis, except for the once verbal root “bind” )‫(עקד‬
in Genesis 22:9, where Abraham prepares Yitskhaq as the sacrificial “lamb” )‫!(שה‬
Genesis 30:36: Lavan sends the “striped” )‫ (עקד‬flocks away with his sons a journey of “three days.”

)‫ (שלשת ימים‬// Abraham and his son travel for “three days” without a lamb, before Abraham “binds” )‫(עקד‬
his son.
Genesis 30:38: Yaaqov places the poplar rods in the water trough )‫ (שקת‬as his scheme to increase his
flocks. // Avraham’s servant in Genesis 24:21 meets Rivqah at the water trough )‫ (שקת‬and allows God to
provide her as a wife. This is a contrast between Yaaqov's scheme and Abraham and his servant’s trust in
God’s provision.
Yaaqov's deception of Lavan regarding his flock leads us back to the Genesis 3 deception, by linking together
the motifs of sibling rivalry and the deception of the firstborn.

Genesis 30:25-43: Yaaqov Deceives Lavan of His
Flock

Hyperlinks in Genesis

Gen. 30:27 “I have learned by divination (‫)נחשתי‬

Gen. 3:1 The snake (‫ )נחש‬resents that God has

that Yahweh has blessed me because of you.”

elevated humans to a place of rule over the
beasts.

Gen. 30:37 “And Yaaqov took for himself a staff of

Gen. 3:1 “Now the snake was more shrewd (‫)ערום‬

fresh poplar and almond wood and plane tree (

than any beast of the field”

‫”)ערמון‬
Gen. 30:40 “And the lambs Yaaqov separated (

The ‫ פרד‬/ separation of brothers motif in Genesis

‫)פרד < הפריד‬, he gave the flocks to face the

Gen. 2:10 Separation of the Eden waters

spotted.”

Gen. 10:5, 32 Separation of the sons of Noah
Gen. 13:9, 11, 14 Abram and Lot separate )‫(הפרד‬
because of their flocks.
Gen. 25:23 Yaaqov and Esau separate from the
womb

Gen. 30:32, 39-42 The puns on the sheep that are

Gen. 10:5, 32 Ham (‫ )חם‬the son of Noah that

“hot” (‫ )חום‬and who “mate/are in heat” (‫)חום‬.

“separates” from his brothers

Connecting Yaaqov’s Deception and Genesis 3. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob
(2021).

Reflection Question
Yaaqov claims that his “righteousness will answer” for him in the deal he makes with Lavan for the flocks (
Gen. 30:33). Do Yaaqov’s actions demonstrate righteousness?

Class Notes: Jacob

117 of 184

