Session 13: Deception in the House of Lavan

Key Takeaways
Lavan’s deception with his daughters is paralleled by his deception with his flocks, providing an implicit
critique of the way these men are using women as objects in their power games.
How we interpret passages depicting the mistreatment of women in the Bible can either illuminate
God’s Eden ideal for humanity or it can short-circuit the potential of millions of God’s image bearers.
When Yaaqov meets Rakhel, he once again moves forward with his own plan to seize blessing for
himself.

Yaaqov's Exile in the House of Lavan
Genesis 29:1-30

Genesis 30:25-43

Lavan Deceives Yaaqov With His Daughters

Genesis 29:31-30:24

Yaaqov Deceives Lavan With His Flocks

Yaaqov’s Rival Wives & Sons
29:1-11

29:15-30
29:12-14

30:25-34
29:31-35

30:14-24

30:37-43
30:35-36

30:1-13

Genesis 29:1-30:43. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

At the very center of the center of the Yaaqov story stands Genesis 29:1-30:43, the narrative of Yaaqov's exile
and slavery to his uncle Lavan in Mesopotamia. This large block of narrative has been carefully designed in a
nested series of symmetrical patterns. Each paired relationship invites us to meditate on the similarities and
differences of the comparison in order to see the deeper message of Yaaqov's exile.

Genesis 29:1-30
Rival Brothers: Yaaqov Is Deceived by Lavan With His Daughters (Named “Lamb” and “Calf”)

• 29:1-11 Yaaqov meets secondborn Rakhel (= “Lamb”) by a well
• 29:12-14 Lavan receives Yaaqov into his family
• 29:15-30 Lavan deceives Yaaqov with firstborn Leah (= “Calf”)
Genesis 29:31-30:24

Class Notes: Jacob

85 of 184

Rival Sisters: Rakhel and Leah Struggle

• 29:31-35 Firstborn unloved Leah births four sons
• 30:1-13 Secondborn loved Rakhel schemes to birth two sons
• 30:14-24 Firstborn unloved Leah usurps Rakhel to birth two more sons
Genesis 30:25-43
Rival Brothers: Yaaqov Counter-Deceives Lavan With His Flocks

• 30:25-34 Yaaqov proposes to care for Lavan’s flocks
• 30:35-36 Lavan’s scheme to deceive Yaaqov again
• 30:37-43 Yaaqov's counter-scheme to deceive Lavan with his flocks
Genesis 29:1-30:43. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Remember, we're already within a larger story about two rival brothers, Yaaqov and Esau, and Yaaqov is on the
run into exile because he deceived his older brother. In the Lavan story, this sibling rivalry motif is expanded
and explored in multiple ways.
In the outer stories (Gen. 29:1-30 and Gen. 30:25-43), Lavan and Yaaqov keep deceiving and counterdeceiving each other in ways that strangely mirror what Yaaqov did to his brother and father. Notice also that
the first story of deception focuses on Lavan’s daughters, who are named after domesticated animals (“Lamb”
and “Calf”) and then, in the matching third story, Yaaqov counter-deceives Lavan with actual domesticated
animals.
In the central story (Gen. 29:31-30:24), the rivalries of Yaaqov and Esau and of Yaaqov and Lavan are mirrored
in the story of the two rival sisters, Rakhel and Leah. They also try to bargain and trick each other to receive a
greater share of the blessing of abundance and fertility, just as Yaaqov did to both Esau and Lavan.
In all of these stories, human characters scheme to achieve the Eden-blessing of God’s abundance, and they
hurt each other in the process. And yet, God meets each of these people, the deceivers and the deceived,
exactly where they’re at and shows them patience and mercy. However, at the same time, the overarching
theme in the Yaaqov story is that God’s providence is at work, and even the selfish schemes of Lavan become
the vehicle of God’s purpose in Yaaqov's life. What Yaaqov did to his family is brought back upon his head, but
in order to humble him and make him into the kind of person who can become the vehicle of God’s blessing to
others.

Yaaqov Meets Rakhel at the Well

1 And Yaaqov lifted up his feet,

and he went to the land of the sons of the East,
2 and he saw , and look: a well in the field,

and look: there were three herds of flocks laying down by it,
because from that well they provided water for the herds ,

Class Notes: Jacob

86 of 184

and the stone over the mouth of the well

was big ,

3 and all the herds would be gathered there,

and they would roll away

the stone from the mouth of the well ,

and they would provide water for the flock ,
and they would return

the stone over the mouth of the well to its place .

Dialogue
4 And Yaaqov said to them,

“My brothers! Where are y’all from?”
And they said,
“We are from Kharan.”
5 And he said to them,

A

“Do y’all know Lavan, son of Nakhor?”
And they said,
“We do know.”
6 And he said to them,

“Is there shalom for him?”
And they said,
“Shalom.”

Rachel

B

And look: Rakhel [= “Lamb”] his daughter was coming with the flock .
7 And he said,

Dialogue
“Look, the day is still big ,
it isn’t time for the livestock to be gathered,
provide water for the flock , and go, graze.”
A'

8 And they said,

“We are not able, until all the herds are gathered,
then they roll away

the stone from the mouth of the well ,

and then we provide water for the flock.”

Rachel
9 And while he was still speaking with them,

B'

then Rakhel came with the flock that belonged to her father,
because she was a shepherd.

Class Notes: Jacob

87 of 184

10 And it came about when Yaaqov saw

Rakhel , daughter of Lavan, brother of his mother,
and the flock of Lavan, brother of his mother,
then he came near,
and he rolled away

the stone over the mouth of the well ,

and he provided water for the flock of Lavan, brother of his mother,
11 and Yaaqov provided water for Rakhel ,

and he lifted up his voice,
and he wept.

Genesis 29:1-11. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

An Eden Well in the East
After Yaaqov is exiled from the new Eden of Canaan, he finds himself among the “sons of the east.” This recalls
all the “eastward” journeys into exile since the garden of Eden.

Eden

Gen. 2:8 The Lord God planted a garden toward the east , in Eden; and there he placed
the man whom he had formed.

Exile From

Gen. 3:24 So he drove the man out; and at the east of the garden of Eden he stationed

the Garden

the cherubim and the flaming sword which turned every direction to guard the way to the
tree of life.

Exile From

Gen. 4:16 Then Cain went out from the presence of the Lord and settled in the land of

Eden

Nod, east of Eden .

Babylon

Gen. 11:2 It came about as they journeyed east , that they found a plain in the land of
Shinar and settled there.

Sodom

Gen. 13:11-12 So Lot chose for himself all the valley of the Jordan, and Lot journeyed
east . Thus they separated from each other. Abram settled in the land of Canaan, while
Lot settled in the cities of the valley, and moved his tents as far as Sodom.

East of the

Gen. 25:5-6 Now Abraham gave all that he had to Yitskhaq; but to the sons of his

Jordan

concubines, Abraham gave gifts while he was still living, and sent them away from his
son Yitskhaq eastward , to the land of the east.

East of Eden. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

But, just as in “Eden of the east” God provides a life-giving spring (see Gen. 2:6, 10-14), Yaaqov happens upon
a well with a great stone over its mouth. This is an important narrative image that recalls the divine provision of
water in the wilderness in the Eden story.

Class Notes: Jacob

88 of 184

Wives, Brothers and Mothers, Bone and Flesh
Recall how the story about the provision of water in Eden (Gen. 2:4-17) was compositionally paired with the
multiplication of the one human into many through the provision of a wife (Gen. 2:18-25). This symbolic pairing
of “water/wife” from the Eden story has been redeployed already in Genesis in the story of Hagar and Ishmael (
Genesis 16 and 21). Here it is drawn upon again.

Yaaqov in Genesis 28-29

The Human in Genesis 2

Gen. 28:10-22 Yaaqov falls asleep alone, and his future

Gen. 2:21 The human falls asleep alone and is

multiplied family is revealed to him

split into two

Gen. 28:14 Yaaqov is told his future seed will be “like

Gen. 2:7 The human was made of the “dust of

the dust of the land”

the ground”

Gen. 29:1, 10 God provides a well in the eastern

Gen. 2:6, 10-14 God provides waters in the

desert, from which Yaaqov “provides water” )‫ (שקה‬for

wilderness that “provides water” )‫ (שקה‬to Eden

the flock

Gen. 29:10-11 Yaaqov meets his future wife at the well

Gen. 2:23 The man wakes up in Eden (by the
river) and sees his new wife

Gen. 29:14 “Truly you are my bone and my flesh!”

Gen. 2:23 “This is bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh!”

Gen. 29 Yaaqov has left his father and mother and

Gen. 2:24 “For this reason, a man will leave his

becomes joined to his wife

father and mother and join himself to his wife”

Yaaqov and Genesis 2. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The point of the analogy: Just like Yaaqov has been exiled from his home because of the “flood” of Esau’s
anger, God graciously provides a new Eden and a new partner for his chosen one as an act of generous mercy.
This entire story is set on analogy with God’s appointment of a human after bringing up the dry land from
among the waters (Gen. 1:1-2:3) and then providing a garden home in the wilderness for his chosen
representatives to flourish (Gen. 2:4-25). Yaaqov and Rakhel are depicted as a new Adam and Eve, but we
already know from the previous section Yaaqov is not innocent.

The Way We Do Things in Kharan
In Genesis 29:2-3, the narrative focuses on the procedures used by the shepherds for watering the flock and
on the timing of watering from the well. The opening scene described the normal day at the well: Herds gather
> roll away stone > water animals > return stone to its place.
Yaaqov barges onto the scene, and in Gen. 29:7, he starts telling them how to do their job! “It’s not time to
gather in the flocks yet. Provide water for them and send the flocks back out!”

Class Notes: Jacob

89 of 184

In Genesis 29:8, the shepherds give a curt reply. “We’re not able )‫ (לא נוכל‬until all the flocks are gathered.
That’s when we roll away the stone and water the animals.” It’s a semi-kind way of telling Yaaqov, “That’s not
how we do things around here.”
The narrative immediately goes on in Genesis 29:9-11 to show how Yaaqov bulldozes right over their cultural
custom. The moment he sees Rakhel, he runs down and does the very thing the shepherds said they don’t do!
He rolls away the stone and he waters the flock of Lavan. This entire exchange and the focus on the well
seems very purposeful on the narrator’s part.
When God provided water in the desert for Eden, and when God provided water for Hagar and Ishmael,
the water came by surprise and at the last minute, when we thought there was no way forward.
In this narrative, God has provided a well and a future wife for Yaaqov. But Yaaqov, eager to seize on an
opportunity, goes ahead and provides water by himself, on his own timeline, even violating the cultural
custom of the east.
And remember: Yaaqov provides water for Lamb (= Rakhel) and for Lavan’s flock. This is a meaningful
portrait of Yaaqov as a brash schemer working from his own agenda regarding Rakhel. This theme will
come up again.
The whole emphasis at work in Genesis 29:1-11 may seem random, but it will become very meaningful when we
turn to the matching panel of the story in Genesis 29:15-30, where we learn that Yaaqov's brashness was very
much noticed by “the men of that place” (Gen. 29:22) and not appreciated at all!

Reflection Question
What are some ways the text signals its critique of the mistreatment of women?

Class Notes: Jacob

90 of 184

