Session 8: Reconciled Through Covenant

Key Takeaways
Yitskhaq’s story in Genesis 26 is the whole biblical narrative in miniature, and it ends with this scene of
reconciliation through covenant.
The biblical authors use garden of Eden imagery to talk about the reconciliation of rival families, linking
this theme to God’s ultimate purpose of bringing blessing to all people through his chosen one.

Yitskhaq and Abimelech Make a Covenant of Peace

26 Now, Avimelek came to him from Gerar,

and his companion Ahuzzath,
and Phicol the commander of his army.
27 And Yitskhaq said to them,

“Why have you come to me,
since you hate me ,
and you sent me away from you ?”

28 And they said,

“We can surely see that Yahweh is with you,
and we say,
‘Let there now be an oath-curse between us,
between you and us,
and let us make a covenant with you,
29 that you will do no bad to us,

just as we have not touched you
and we have done to you nothing but good
and we will send you away in peace.
You are now the one blessed by Yahweh.’”

30 And he made them a feast,

and they ate and drank.
31 And arose early in the morning,

and they swore oaths , each to his brother
and Yitskhaq sent them away

Class Notes: Jacob

47 of 184

and they went from him in peace .

32 And it came about on the same day,

that Yitskhaq's servants came,
and they told him about the well which they had dug
and they said to him, “ We have found water .”
33 And he called it “ Oath ”;

therefore the name of the city is “ Well

of Oath ” to this day.

Genesis 26:26-33. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Tribal Rivalry Reconciled Through Covenant
Just like after the flood, when God reconciled with violent humans through a covenant, here potentially violent
humans reconcile through covenant.
Note: The seemingly random mention of “Phicol, commander of the army” (Gen. 26:26) is a subtle recall of the
“sons of elohim” and their violent warrior offspring, the Nephilim from Genesis 6:1-4. The sons of elohim can
also be called “the army of the skies” (a.k.a. “the host of heaven,” see 1 Kgs. 22:19 and Job 1:6-8). Here in the
Yitskhaq story, the presence of Phikol makes us think of the mutant warriors of Genesis 6:4, but only to twist
our expectation. Now, the warriors come to make peace with God’s chosen one!
Just as Abimelech made peace with Abraham (about a disputed well!) through a covenant in Genesis 21:21-34,
so now Abimelech makes a similar pact with Abraham’s son about disputed wells.
This story becomes a narrative image of how Yahweh wants to spread the Eden blessing out to the nations
through his chosen family. It requires courageous honesty in his chosen one (Yitskhaq, who fails at first), and it
requires an openness among the nations to receive God’s chosen one (Abimelech, who also fails at first). But
both of these failures are reversed by the end of Genesis 26, and the nations reconcile and live in peace
through the covenant at the Well of Seven!
The point: When God’s chosen one simply trusts the promise, they discover God’s life-giving blessing even in
the midst of death and desert. When the nations acknowledge God’s chosen one, they find themselves
included in the Eden blessing through the covenant!

Concluding Reflections on the Stories of Yitskhaq and Abraham
As we conclude the story of Yitskhaq, we see how every part of his story has been mapped onto the story of
his father Abraham.

Class Notes: Jacob

48 of 184

Avraham entered Canaan in a time of famine.

Yitskhaq comes of age in Canaan in a time of
famine.

Avraham put God’s promise and his wife at risk

Yitskhaq puts God’s promise and his wife at risk

because of fear (the Pharaoh and Avimelek

because of fear (the Avimelek debacle).

debacles).

Avraham became wealthy because of God’s

Yitskhaq became wealthy because of God’s

blessing, and this caused rivalry and conflict with

blessing, and this caused rivalry and conflict with

the non-chosen (Avraham and Lot).

the non-chosen.

This conflict with the nations, about wells, was

This conflict with the nations, about wells, was

only resolved through a covenant.

only resolved through a covenant.

Reflections on the Stories of Yitskhaq and Avraham. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom:
Jacob (2021).

This is a very clear narrative strategy that shows how the son’s life is a replay and twist on the story of the
father’s life. Which makes us wonder about Yitskhaq’s sons. Will they also replay the story of their father’s
failures and successes?
Abraham had conflict with Lot, Pharaoh, and Abimelech.
Yitskhaq has conflict with Abimelech that is resolved through covenant.
Yaaqov will have conflict with Esau.
Yaaqov and his descendants will also have a conflict with Pharaoh.

Reflection Question
How does Yitskhaq’s story tell the whole biblical narrative in miniature?

Class Notes: Jacob

49 of 184

