Session 18: Jacob Versus the Narrator

Key Takeaways
Yaaqov sees how Lavan’s “face” has changed toward him, beginning a pattern of reckoning, where
Yaaqov will have to “face” those he has deceived.
Yaaqov ascribes his prosperity to God, but his account contradicts the narrator’s presentation.
The virgin birth of Jesus brings new creation life to the world free from the manipulation of human
desires and scheming.

Yaaqov Persuades His Wives to Flee

1 And he heard the words of Lavan’s sons (‫)בני לבן‬, saying,

“Yaaqov has taken away all that belongs to our father (‫ )לאבינו‬,
and from what belongs to our father (‫)לאבינו‬
he has made all this wealth.”
2 And Yaaqov saw the face of Lavan (‫)פני לבן‬,

and behold, it was not toward him as formerly.
3 And Yahweh said to Yaaqov,

“ Return to the land of your fathers and to your birth-family,
and I will be with you .”

4 And Yaaqov sent,

and he called Rakhel and Leah to his flock in the field,
5 and said to them,

“I see your father’s face,
that it is not toward me as formerly,
but the God of my father has been with me .
6 And you know that I have served your father with all my strength.
7 And your father has cheated me

and he has changed my wages ten times;
and God did not allow him to do evil to me.
8 If he said this, ‘The speckled shall be your wage,’

then all the flock brought forth speckled ;
and if he said this, ‘The striped shall be your wage,’
then all the flock brought forth striped .
9 And God has delivered the livestock of your father and given to me .

Class Notes: Jacob

118 of 184

10 And it came about at the time when the flock were mating

and I lifted my eyes and saw in a dream, and behold,
the male goats which were going up onto the flock ,
were striped, speckled, and mottled .
11 And the angel of God said to me in the dream, ‘Yaaqov,’

and I said, ‘Here I am.’
12 And he said,

‘Lift now your eyes and see,
all the male goats which are going up onto the flock
are striped, speckled, and mottled ;
for I have seen all that Lavan has been doing to you.
13 I am the God of Bethel,

where you anointed a pillar,
where you made a vow to me;
now arise, go out from this land ,
and return to the land of your birth-family .’”

14 And Rakhel and Leah said to him,

“Do we still have any portion or inheritance in our father’s house?
15 Are we not reckoned by him as foreigners?

For he has sold us and has also entirely consumed our silver.
16 Surely all the wealth which

God has delivered from

our father (‫ )מאבינו‬,

it belongs to us and to our sons (‫ )לנו ולבנינו‬.
Now then, whatever God has said to you, do it !”

Genesis 31:1-16. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Yaaqov and Abraham
God’s appearance to Yaaqov in Genesis 31:3 is the first time God has spoken to Yaaqov since the Bethel dream
in Genesis 28:10-22 (Bethel will be brought up later in this unit in Gen. 31:13). Here, the language of the Bethel
dream is recalled, and it's also connected to God’s words to Abraham, creating an important analogy between
Yaaqov and Abraham.

Genesis 28:10-22
God Appears to Yaaqov at Bethel
“Look, I am with you”
“I will return you to this land”

Genesis 29:1-30:43
Yaaqov's Exile in Lavan’s house

Class Notes: Jacob

119 of 184

Genesis 31:1-16
God Appears to Yaaqov in Exile
“Return to the land of your fathers and your birth-family ”
“And I will be with you”
“Return to the land of your birth-family ”

Genesis 28:10-31:16. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The word “birth-family” (Heb. ‫ (מולדת‬is the same key word God used when he addressed Abraham and told
him to leave this exact same place, Kharan, and go to the land of Canaan.
Genesis 12:1 Instructor's Translation
Go forth from your land,
and from your birth-family,
and from your father’s house,
to the land which I will make seen to you;
Yet in Genesis 24, when Abraham sends his servant to “the land of my birth family” (Gen. 24:4, 7), this refers to
Kharan, where Yaaqov has been exiled. Now, in the 20 years of Yaaqov's exile, the situation has reversed.
Canaan is the “land of your birth-family” for Yaaqov, and so now becomes the home-base to which he must
return.
Yaaqov, the grandson of Abraham and the inheritor of the promise and blessing, is now the new
“Adam/Abraham.”

Yaaqov Versus the Narrator
Yaaqov's speech to his wives is curious in many ways. He recounts the fact that Yahweh appeared to him,
summoning him to return to his homeland. But when he recounts the story of Lavan’s deception and the
breeding of the flocks, he offers a report that differs from the one given by the narrator in Genesis 30.
The comparison chart below shows the differences. Yaaqov's version consistently skews the details in his
favor, and gives the feeling that he is manipulating the story to persuade his wives and secure his desired
outcome.

Yaaqov's Speech in Genesis 31:4-13

The Narratives Referred to in Genesis 30-31

Gen. 31:4-5 And Yaaqov sent and called Rakhel

Gen. 31:3 Return to the land of your fathers and

and Leah to his flock in the field,

to your family, and I will be with you .

and said to them,
“I see your father’s face,

Yaaqov’s Speech in Genesis 31. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

120 of 184

Yaaqov's Speech in Genesis 31:4-13

The Narratives Referred to in Genesis 30-31

that it is not toward me as formerly,
but the God of my father has been with me .”

Gen. 31:6-7 And you know that I have served your

Gen. 29:15 Aren’t you my brother? Should you

father with all my strength.

serve me for nothing? Tell me, what is your wage?

And your father has cheated me and changed my
wages ten times;
and God did not allow him to do evil to me.

Gen. 31:8-9 If [Lavan] said this,

Gen. 30:32 I will pass through your flock today,

“The speckled shall be your wages,”

removing every lamb that is speckled and spotted

then all the flock brought forth speckled ;

… and it will be my wage.

and if [Lavan] said this,
“The striped shall be your wages,”
then all the flock brought forth striped .
And God has delivered your father's livestock
and given to me.

Gen. 30:34 And Lavan said, “Let it be according to
your word.”
Gen. 30:39 And the flock birthed striped,
speckled, and spotted.

Gen. 31:10-12 And it came about at the time when

Gen. 30:37-42 And Yaaqov took rods of fresh

the flock were mating, and I lifted my eyes and

poplar and almond and plane trees,

saw in a dream, and behold, the male goats

and he peeled white stripes in them, exposing the

which were going up onto the flock, the striped,

white on the rods.

speckled, and mottled .

And he placed the rods which he had peeled

And the angel of God said to me in the dream,

in front of the flock, in the troughs,

“Yaaqov,” and I said, “Here I am.”

in the watering troughs, where the flocks came to

And he said, “ Lift now your eyes and see ,

drink;

all the male goats which are going up onto the

and they mated when they came to drink.

flock are striped, speckled, and mottled ;

And the flocks mated with/upon the rods,

for I have seen all that Lavan has been doing to

and the flocks gave birth to striped , speckled ,

you.”

and spotted . ...
And it came about in all the mating of the strong
ones of the flock,
Yaaqov would set the rods in the sight of the
flock in the troughs ,
so that they would mate by the rods;
and when the flock was weak ,
he did not set them
and the weak ones belonged to Lavan
and the strong ones belonged to Yaaqov.

Yaaqov’s Speech in Genesis 31. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

121 of 184

Yaaqov's Speech in Genesis 31:4-13

The Narratives Referred to in Genesis 30-31

Gen. 31:13 I am the God of Bethel,

Reference back to Gen. 28:10-22

where you anointed a pillar,
where you made a vow to me;

Gen. 31:13 ... now arise, go out this land, and

Gen. 31:3 Return to the land of your fathers and

return to the land of your birth .

to your family, and I will be with you .

Yaaqov’s Speech in Genesis 31. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Notice how Yaaqov's speech opens and closes in Genesis 31:5 and 31:13 with adapted quotations of each part
of the divine speech from Genesis 31:3.
The center part of the speech is an abbreviated summary of Yaaqov and Lavan’s interactions from
Genesis 29-30.
The report of Yaaqov's dream, however, differs significantly from the narrative in 30:30-42.
Yaaqov presents the mating of the flocks as happening completely under God’s direction (like Noah’s
animals getting on and off the ark). Yaaqov omits all mentions of his manipulation of the flock with fake
mating rods.
Yaaqov also omits any reference to his selective breeding, how he would place the rods by the strong of
the flock so that Lavan’s animals would get weaker over time.
While subtle, this seems to be a narrative strategy to portray Yaaqov's dream report as unreliable. While
it is true that God spoke to him at Bethel and summoned him back to Canaan, his representation of what
happened with their father’s flocks is portrayed as yet another act of manipulation, this time to persuade
Lavan’s daughters to come with him back to Canaan. In contrast to Abraham’s servant in Genesis 24,
who trusted God and let Rivqah make her own choice to come back to Canaan with him, here Yaaqov
manipulates his wives by twisting the story of his manipulation of Lavan’s flocks. Once again, Yaaqov
doesn’t trust God’s words in Genesis 31:3 (“I will be with you”), and he schemes his own way to realize
the divine blessing and promise.
Yaaqov's speech and Rakhel and Leah’s response in Genesis 31:5-16 is a sophisticated summary of chapters
29-30, which has been interwoven with larger design patterns in Genesis.
Genesis 31:8-9 summarizes the sheep-mating deception Yaaqov performed in Genesis 30:25-43.
Genesis 31:10-12 links Yaaqov's deception to a dream that is similar to his Bethel dream-vision in
Genesis 28:10-22, but this dream is specifically patterned after the 'aqedah of Genesis 22. Yaaqov “lifts
his eyes” during a dream about his deception of Lavan, in contrast to the scene where Abraham is about
to sacrifice Yitskhaq and the “angel of Yahweh” calls out and he responds “here I am” and he “lifts his
eyes” and sees a ram caught in the thicket (Gen. 22:12-13). Here we discover that God allowed Yaaqov's
treachery (the opposite of Abraham’s faithfulness) to create fruitfulness, even though it contrasts with
Abraham’s faithfulness that resulted in fruitfulness.

Class Notes: Jacob

122 of 184

In Genesis 31:10-11, the vocabulary of Yaaqov's dream echoes his earlier dream in Genesis 28:10-22: He
looks up and see goats “going up” )‫ (עלים‬and “speckled” )‫ברדים‬, a pun on “the one going down” ‫ ירדים‬in
Gen. 28:10-22).
Genesis 31:13 is a reference back to Yaaqov's vow at Bethel back in Genesis 28:20, and it's a link back to
the beginning of this episode (Gen. 31:3), which is God’s command that Yaaqov leave Kharan, cast in
language identical to God’s command that Abraham leave Kharan and go to Canaan (Gen. 12:1).
In Genesis 31:14-15, Rakhel and Leah’s response recalls Yaaqov's deception of Esau. “Do we still have a
share )‫ (חלק‬and inheritance )‫ (נחלה‬in the house of our father?” This recalls Yaaqov's smooth )‫ (חלק‬skin (
Gen. 27:11, 16) that allowed him to swindle Esau of his inheritance. Their description of Lavan’s “selling”

)‫ (מכר‬and “eating” )‫ (אכל‬his daughters inheritance recalls Esau’s behavior in the same story, where he
“sells” his birthright to “eat” a bowl of lentils (Gen. 25:33).

Reflection Question
What are two ways we could read Yaaqov’s account of his prosperity with the flocks? How can we discern the
meaning of this story?

Class Notes: Jacob

123 of 184

