Session 14: Laban Deceives Jacob

Key Takeaways
Human favoritism is a distorted version of God’s love and favor for the chosen one, which is bestowed
for the blessing of the many.
Yaaqov, with his four wives, is the furthest yet from the Eden ideal for marriage.
God institutes laws protecting the firstborn’s rights against favoritism, but God also loves to topple
hierarchies to elevate the unloved and non-chosen.

Lavan the Deceiver, Rakhel and Leah the Trees

12 And Yaaqov told

Rakhel

that he was the brother of her father ,
and that he was the son of Rebekah ,
then she ran and told her father.

13 And it came about when Lavan heard the report of Yaaqov, son of his sister ,

then he ran to meet him,
and he embraced him,
and he kissed him,
and he brought him into his house,
and he reported to Lavan all of these words.

14 And Lavan said to him,

“Truly, you are my bone and my flesh !”
And he dwelt with him a month of days (‫ )חדש ימים‬.

Genesis 29:12-14. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Lavan's Proposal
15 And Lavan said to Yaaqov,

A

“Are you really my brother,
yet you serve me for nothing?
Tell me, what is your wage?”

Lavan's Daughters

Class Notes: Jacob

91 of 184

16 Now, Lavan had two daughters,

the name of the big one was Leah [= “Cow”],
B

and the name of the small one was Rakhel [= “Lamb”].
17 Now, the eyes of Leah were tender ,

and Rakhel was beautiful of form
and beautiful of sight .

Proposal Implemented
18 And Yaaqov loved Rakhel ,

and he said,
“I will serve you seven years for Rakhel , your smaller daughter,
19 And Lavan said,

“It is more good that I give her to you,

A'

than giving her to another man.
Dwell with me!”
20 And Yaaqov served for Rakhel for seven years ,

and they were in his eyes like a few days (‫)ימים אחדים‬,
because of his love for her.

Lavan Gives the Wrong Daughter + a Slave
21 And Yaaqov said to Lavan,

“ Give me my wife,
because my days are fulfilled,
so I can go into her.”
22 And Lavan gathered all the men of the place ,

A

and he made a drinking-feast,
23 and it came about in the evening,

then he took

Leah his daughter,

and he brought her to him,
and he went into her.
24 And Lavan gave Zilpah his female slave to Leah his daughter as a female slave.

Lavan's Deception Exposed
25 And it came about in the morning,

and look: She was Leah !
And he said to Lavan,
“ What is this you have done to me ?!
Didn’t I serve you for Rakhel ?
B

Class Notes: Jacob

So why did you deceive me ?!”

92 of 184

B

26 And Lavan said,

“This is not how it’s done in our place ,
to give the little one before the firstborn .
27 Fulfill this seven ,

then I will give to you also this one for the service ,
which you will serve with me still another seven years .”

Lavan Gives the Right Daughter + a Slave
28 And Yaaqov did this,

and he fulfilled this seven ,
and he gave to him Rakhel his daughter for him as a wife.
A'

29 And Lavan gave to Rakhel his daughter Bilhah his female slave as her female slave.
30 And he also went into Rakhel ,

and he also loved Rakhel more than Leah ,
and he served him still another seven years .

Genesis 29:15-30. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
Following the scenes in Genesis 28:10-22 and Genesis 29:1-14, which both mapped onto the creation of Eden
story and the provision of a partner for the lonely human, we now hear the next notes of the melody: the
deception, a test, and the failure. This entire story is mapped onto the narrative pattern of Genesis 3.

Lavan's Deception in the East

The Snake’s Deception in Eden of the East

Gen. 29:16-19 Two daughters in Lavan’s family

Gen. 3:6-7 Two trees in the garden

• Leah’s eyes are “tender” (rak/‫)רך‬

• The forbidden tree is about knowing good )‫(טוב‬

• Rakhel is “beautiful of sight/form” )‫ יפה מראה‬/

and bad (ra‘/‫(רע‬

‫(תאר‬

• The forbidden tree is “good of sight and desirable

• “It is more good )‫ (טוב‬that I give her to you …”

to the eyes” (‫ טוב מראה‬/ ‫(תאוה לעינים‬

Gen. 29:23 Lavan deceptively “takes” )‫ (לקח‬the

Gen. 3:6 The woman “took” )‫ (לקח‬the fruit from

older daughter and “gives” )‫ (נתן‬her to Yaaqov.

the tree and she ate, then she “gave” )‫ (נתן‬to her
husband and he ate.

Gen. 29:25 After realizing the deception, Yaaqov

Gen. 3:13 After the humans are deceived and

says, “What is this you have done to me?!”

disobey God’s command, God says, “What is this

)‫(מה זאת עשית לי‬

you have done?” )‫(מה זאת עשית‬

Gen. 29:26-30 Lavan’s deception results in

Gen. 3:23 The deception results in “slavery” )‫(עבד‬

“service/slavery” )‫ (עבד‬to Lavan for 2x7 years.

to the ground until death.

Lavan the Snake. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

93 of 184

Also important is how the three stories of Abraham and Yitskhaq putting their wives at risk are being drawn
upon for the analogy between the daughters and the trees.

Genesis 2-3

Genesis 12

Genesis 20

Gen. 3:6 And the woman

Gen. 12:11-12 I know )‫ (ידע‬that a

Gen. 20:2 Abraham said of

)‫ (האשה‬saw )‫ (ראה‬that good

woman )‫ (אשה‬beautiful of sight

Sarah, “She is my sister.”

)‫ (טוב‬was the tree for eating,

)‫ (מראה‬you are … and they will see

And Abimelech king of

and desirable to the eyes …

you )‫ … (ראה‬and kill me and let you

Gerar sent and took )‫(לקח‬

and she took )‫… (לקח‬

live )‫(הוה‬

Sarah.

Gen. 2:17 From the tree of

Gen. 20:3 Look, you are

knowing good and bad you

dead )‫(מת‬, on account of

must not eat, because in the

the woman whom you

day you eat from it, you will

took .

certainly die )‫(מות תמות‬.
Gen. 20:7 … and if you
don’t return her, do that
you will certainly die

)‫… (מות תמות‬
Gen. 3:3 From the tree that is in

Gen. 12:17 And Yahweh

Gen. 20:6 God said to him

the middle of the garden we

touched/struck )‫ (נגע‬Pharaoh with

… “I did not allow you to

cannot eat from it or touch it

touches/strikes )‫(נגעים‬

touch/strike )‫”(נגע‬

Gen. 3:9 And Yahweh called

Gen. 12:18 And Pharaoh called out

Gen. 20:9 Abimelech

out to )‫ (ויקרא‬the man …

to )‫ (ויקרא‬Abram and said, “ What is

called out to )‫(ויקרא‬

this you have done )‫ (מה זאת עשית‬to

Abraham and said, “ What

me? You didn’t tell )‫ (נגד‬me that she

have you done to us

was your wife.”

)‫”?(מה עשית לנו‬

Gen. 2:16 And Yahweh

Gen. 12:20 And Pharaoh

Gen. 20:15 And Abimelech

commanded (‫ )ויצו‬the human

commanded )‫ … (ויצו‬and sent him

said, “Behold, my land is

…

away )‫(שלח‬.

before you, dwell )‫ (ישב‬in

)‫(נגע‬

Gen. 3:13 And Yahweh said to
the woman, “ What is this you
have done )‫”?(מה זאת עשית‬

the good in your eyes

)‫(טוב בעיניך‬.”
Gen. 3:23 And Yahweh sent

Wives at Risk. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

94 of 184

Genesis 2-3

Genesis 12

Genesis 20

away )‫ (שלח‬the human from
the garden of Eden.

Gen. 3:5 … in the day that you

Gen. 20:16 One thousand

eat from it your eyes )‫(עיניכם‬

silver pieces … let it be as a

will be opened …

covering of the eyes

)‫ (כסות עינים‬for you.
Wives at Risk. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

In all of these stories, a snake-like deceiver takes what God has given as a blessing (trees/a wife), and twists it
into a violation of God’s command and promise.
In Genesis 3, the snake deceived a husband and wife about a forbidden tree.
In Genesis 12, 20, and 26, the husband acts like a deceitful snake about a forbidden wife.
In Genesis 29, the father acts like a deceitful snake about his daughters and uses them to co-opt for
himself the blessing of God’s chosen one.

That’s Not How We Do Things Around Here
Recall Yaaqov's long conversations with the shepherds in Genesis 29:4-8 and the seemingly random focus on
the eastern shepherds' normal custom of waiting to water their sheep until all the flocks are gathered (
Gen. 29:1-3) and not before (as they say to Yaaqov in Gen. 29:7-8). There is a significant effort made by the
author to recall those themes here in this panel about Lavan’s deception and Yaaqov's marriage to his
daughters.

Class Notes: Jacob

95 of 184

Genesis 29:1-11
29:3-6 The shepherds

Genesis 29:15-30
Genesis 29:12-14

29:22 The men who

who know Lavan

“And Rakhel ran and

come to Yaaqov’s

gather by the well

reported this to her

wedding are called

with the “stone ... in

father”

“ the men of the

its )‫ (מקום‬place .”

“And Yaaqov reported

place )‫” (מקום‬.

29:3, 8 They gather

all these things to

29:22 “Lavan

)‫ (אסף‬all the flocks

Lavan”

gathered )‫ (אסף‬the

by the well and then

men of the place

can provide drinking

and he made a

water )‫ (שקה‬to the

drinking feast

flocks.

)‫ (משתה‬for them.”

29:10-11 Yaaqov

29:18 Yaaqov

barges ahead to

assumes he can ask

water the flock )‫(וישק‬

to marry Rakhel , the

and to kiss )‫(וישק‬

younger daughter,

Rakhel .

before Leah, the older

29:8 “We are not

daughter

able [to water the

29:25-26 Yaaqov:

flock] until all the

“Why did you deceive

herds are gathered .

me?!”

That’s when we water

Lavan: “ That’s not

the flock.”

how things are done
in our place )‫ (מקום‬,
to give the little one
before the firstborn.”

Genesis 29:1-30. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

These repetitions use deliberate strategy to compare Yaaqov's brash behavior with Rakhel and the flocks with
his equally brash request to marry the younger daughter before the older.
The role of the shepherds and the men of the place are exactly parallel: both are present at the two “drinking”
sources in the story (a well and a drinking party).

Class Notes: Jacob

96 of 184

And Lavan and the shepherds play the same role: to inform Yaaqov that “That’s now how we do things around
here in Kharan!”
Yaaqov's role as the trickster and manipulator in his own family may have brought him success up to a point,
but now that he’s swimming in a bigger pond, he finds that his old tricks don’t work so well anymore.

Deceptions Within Deceptions: “The One Who Digs a Pit Falls Into It
...”
The narrative of Yaaqov in exile has been designed as an elaborate exploration of the theme in Proverbs about
how the schemes of the wicked always come back upon them.
Proverbs 26:24-27 Instructor's Translation
24

Whoever hates, he disguises himself with his lips,

and harbors deception
25

in his heart;

when he speaks with generous grace,

do not believe him,
for seven abominations in his heart;
26

although his hatred is covered with trickery,

his evil will be exposed in the assembly.
27

Whoever digs a pit will fall into it,

and whoever rolls a stone,

it will turn back onto him.

This proverb is a classic statement of the biblical “eye for eye” model of recompense: Whatever you’ve done to
others will eventually make its way back to you. Notice how in this first story of Lavan’s deception, he does to
Yaaqov exactly what Yaaqov did to his family members.
Lavan’s deception contains the main features of Yaaqov and Rivqah’s deception.
Rakhel is the younger sibling, favored by Yaaqov // Yaaqov is the younger sibling, loved by Rivqah and
chosen by God
Leah is the older sibling, unloved by Yaaqov // Esau is the older sibling, loved by Yitskhaq, non-chosen
by God
Yaaqov deceives Esau to get the “firstborn right” // Lavan deceives Yaaqov with his firstborn daughter
Yaaqov's deception earned him the blessing // Lavan’s deception inverts the blessing into slavery
Lavan's deception also uses key words and themes from the Yaaqov story: disguising oneself, deception,
trickery, seven, and rolling a stone.

Reflection Question
How is Lavan’s deception at Yaaqov’s wedding a distorted version of Eden blessing and a reversal of Yaaqov’s
own deceptions?

Class Notes: Jacob

97 of 184

