Session 19: Lavan Pursues Jacob

Key Takeaways
Both Yaaqov and Lavan deceive each other and then proclaim their innocence. Each feels justified in his
anger because of the wrongs of the other.
The household gods (Heb. teraphim) were commonly used in divination to consult the will of the gods.
Rakhel’s theft of the household gods parallels Yaaqov’s theft of the flocks, both believing that their
fertility, security, and future will be provided by taking matters into their own hands.

Lavan Chases and Overtakes Yaaqov

17 And Yaaqov arose and put his children and his wives upon camels;
18 and he led away all his livestock

and all his property, which he had gathered,
his acquired livestock, which he had gathered in Paddan-aram,
to go to Yitskhaq his father, to the land of Canaan.

19 Now, Lavan had gone to shear his flock,

and Rakhel stole the household idols that were her father’s.
20 And Yaaqov stole the heart of Lavan (‫ )לב לבן‬the Aramean

by not reporting to him that he was fleeing .

21 And he fled , he and everything that belonged to him,

and he arose and crossed the river,
and he set his face toward the hill country of Gilead .

22 And it was reported to Lavan on the third day that Yaaqov had fled ,
23 and he took his brothers with him

and chased after him seven days’ journey,
and he clung to (‫ )וידבק‬him in the hill country of Gilead .

24 And God came to Lavan the Aramean in a dream of the night and said to him,

“ Guard yourself ,
so that you don’t speak to Yaaqov either

Class Notes: Jacob

good or evil .”

124 of 184

25 And Lavan overtook Yaaqov.

And Yaaqov had pitched his tent in the hill country ,
and Lavan had pitched with his brothers in the hill country of Gilead .

26 And Lavan said to Yaaqov,

“ What have you done,
that you should steal my heart
and lead away my daughters like captives of the sword?

27 Why did you hide yourself to flee and steal me,

and did not report to me
that I might have sent you away with joy and with songs, with timbrel and with lyre;
28 and you did not allow me to kiss my sons (‫)לבני‬

and my daughters (‫? )לבנתי‬

Now you have acted foolishly.

29 It is in my power to do you evil ,

but the Elohim of your father spoke to me last night, saying,
‘ Guard yourself ,
so as not to speak to Yaaqov either

good or evil .’

30 And now, you have indeed gone away,

because you longed greatly for your father’s house;
Why did you steal my elohim?”

31 And Yaaqov replied and he said to Lavan ,

“Because I was afraid,
for I said, ‘So that you don’t seize your daughters from me!’
32 With whomever you find your elohim, that one will not live!

In the presence of our brothers, recognize what is yours from what is with me, and take it! ”
Now, Yaaqov did not know that Rakhel had stolen them.

33 And Lavan went into Yaaqov's tent

and into Leah’s tent
and into the tent of the two maids,
but he did not find .
And he went out of Leah’s tent,
and entered Rakhel's tent.

34 Now, Rakhel had taken the household idols

and she put them in the camel’s saddle,
and she sat on them.
And Lavan felt through all the tent
but he did not find .

Class Notes: Jacob

125 of 184

35 And she said to her father,

“Don’t let there be hot-anger in the eyes of my master,
because I’m not able to rise before you,
for the way of women is upon me.”
And he searched,
but he did not find the household idols.

36 And there was hot-anger to Yaaqov,

and he entered into a contention with Lavan;

and Yaaqov replied and he said to Lavan ,
“What is my transgression?!
What is my sin that you have hotly pursued me?
37 Though you have felt through all my goods,

what have you found of all the goods of your house?
Place it here in front of my brothers and your brothers,
that they may act as the mediator between us two.

38 These twenty years I was with you ;

your ewe-lambs (‫ )רחל‬and your female goats have not miscarried,
nor have I eaten the rams (‫ )אילי‬of your flocks.
39 That which was torn of beasts, I did not bring to you;

I bore the loss of it myself.
You required it of my hand,
stolen by day or stolen by night .
40 During the day I was eaten by the heat,

and by the frost at night,
and my sleep fled from my eyes.
41 These twenty years I have been in your house ;

I served you four-ten years for your two daughters,
and six years for your flock,
and you changed my wages ten times.

42 If the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had not been for me ,

surely now you would have sent me away empty-handed.
God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands,
and he acted as a mediator last night.”

Genesis 31:17-42. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Yaaqov's Ancestral Deception Exposed
Class Notes: Jacob

126 of 184

In this section, Yaaqov is confronted by Lavan in a way that recalls the earlier stories about Abraham and
Yitskhaq’s deception of Abimelech.

Yaaqov's Deception

Yitskhaq’s Deception

Abraham's Deception

Gen. 29, 31 Yaaqov manipulates

Gen. 26:1-11 Yitskhaq lies to the

Gen. 20 Abraham lies to the

Laban’s flocks to increase his

Philistines and Abimelech about

Philistines and Abimelech about

own and decrease Laban’s, after

his wife being his sister

his wife being his sister

Laban lied about his daughter
and “gave” him the wrong wife.

Gen. 31:24 God confronts Laban

Gen. 20:3 God confronts

in “a dream of the night”

Abimelech in a “dream of the
night”

Gen. 31:31 Yaaqov confesses his

Gen. 26:7 Yitskhaq’s deception

deception

Gen. 20:10-11 Abraham’s
deception

“And he said, ‘She is my sister,’
to say

“And Abimelech said to

“Because I was afraid

because he was afraid

)‫(כי יראתי‬, because I said

)‫(כי ירא לאמר‬, ‘ my wife ,’

Abraham,

)‫(כי אמרתי‬,

so that ‘the men of the place

‘What did you see )‫(ראית‬, that

‘So that you don’t steal )‫(פן תגזל‬

don’t murder me )‫ (פן יהרגני‬on

you have done this thing?’

your daughters from me!’”

account of Rivqah.’”

And Abraham said,
‘ It’s because I said )‫(כי אמרתי‬,
“Surely there is no fear )‫(יראת‬
of Elohim in this place, so they
will murder me on account of
my wife .”’”

Gen. 30:43 Yaaqov’s wealth

Gen. 26:13-14 Yitskhaq’s wealth

Gen. 20:14 Abraham’s wealth

from his deception

after his deception

from his deception

“And the man broke out very,

“And [Yitskhaq] became great,

“And Abimelech took flocks and

very much, and there were for

and continued to grow great,

cattle and slaves and female

him many flocks and female and

until he became very great;

slaves,

male servants and camels and

and he had possessions of

and he gave them to Abraham,

donkeys.”

flocks and herds and a great

and he returned to him Sarah his

household”

wife.”

Yaaqov’s Generational Deception. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

These intentional comparisons confirm that Yaaqov's strategy with Lavan's flocks was a fear-inspired
manipulation, and so was his secretive flight from Lavan's house.

Class Notes: Jacob

127 of 184

Yaaqov's fear of Lavan is set on analogy with Abraham and Yitskhaq’s fear of the Philistines, and his fear
represents a lack of trust in Yahweh’s promise that “I will be with you.”

Yaaqov's Flight and Rakhel’s Theft
Notice how Yaaqov and Rakhel’s “thefts” are set on close analogy to each other in Genesis 31:19-30.
Genesis 31:19-20 NASB
19

... and Rachel

20

And Jacob

stole

stole

the household idols that were her father’s.

the heart of Laban the Aramean

This tight analogy invites us to ponder all the ways that Yaaqov has “stolen” from Lavan (through manipulation
of the flocks, and now by fleeing in secret). But recall that Yaaqov's deceptive theft of Lavan’s flocks, and now
of his daughters, is a continuation of the ways that Yaaqov had also deceived his own father and brother with
food and disguises, all aimed at acquiring the blessing of Eden abundance.
The analogy is brought even closer in the curious scene where Lavan searches and “feels” for his idol gods in
the tent. This entire scene is a replay of Yaaqov's deception of his father.

Jacob Deceives His Father

Rachel Deceives Her Father

Gen. 27:8-13 Rebekah proposes the

Gen. 31:31-32 Jacob proposes the secretive flight, and

scheme, and invites “the curse” (‫ )קללה‬to

invokes a curse upon whoever stole the idols: “Whoever is

come upon her if Jacob is found out.

found to have your idol-gods, they will not live!”

Gen. 27:15-16 Jacob dresses up with goat

Gen. 31:34 Rachel sits upon the camel-saddle

skin

Gen. 27:21-23 Yitskhaq “feels” )‫(משש‬

Gen. 31:34-35 Laban “feels” )‫ (משש‬through Rachel’s tent

Jacob’s arms and doesn’t find out his true

and doesn’t find the idol-gods

identity

Yaaqov’s Deception and Rakhel’s Theft. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The network of analogies mutually illuminates the motives of the characters in each case.
Yaaqov “stole” the blessing from Esau/Yitskhaq in order to gain the abundance of Eden.
Yaaqov “stole” the flocks of Lavan in order to gain abundance for himself and his family.
Rakhel “stole” the idol-gods of Lavan in order to gain ... what?
It's surely intentional that we are not told about Rakhel's motives for stealing the idol-gods. We're meant to
meditate on the portrait of her character and on the meaning of these analogies to understand her actions. It
also helps to know what the teraphim actually are!

Class Notes: Jacob

128 of 184

What Were the Teraphim/Idol-Gods?
Teraphim (Heb. ‫ (תרפים‬are small idol statues that were placed in homes (tents, houses) or in the home of a
deity (shrine, temple). A quick survey of the word’s usage in the Hebrew Bible shows the role they played in
Canaanite and Israelite religion.
2 Kings 23:24 NASB
Moreover, Josiah removed the mediums and the diviners and the teraphim and the idols and all the
abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, that he might confirm the words of the
law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the LORD.
Ezekiel 21:21 NASB
For the king of Babylon stands at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination; he
shakes the arrows, he consults the teraphim, he looks at the liver.
Zechariah 10:2 NASB
For the teraphim speak iniquity, and the diviners see lying visions and tell false dreams; they comfort in
vain. Therefore the people wander like sheep, they are afflicted, because there is no shepherd.
These texts make clear that the teraphim were consulted in ritual practices in order to gain information from
the gods. This brings to mind one other important moment in the Yaaqov story that brings all the pieces
together.
Genesis 30:27-28 Instructor's Translation
And Lavan said to Yaaqov, “If I have found favor in your eyes, I have learned by

divination

that Yahweh

has blessed me on account of you. Now then, mark your wages and I will give it.”
How is it that Lavan “learned by divination” (spelled nakhash, same letters as “snake” in Hebrew) that Yaaqov
was the source of Yahweh’s blessing on his household? The narrative doesn’t say in the moment, but delays
telling us until Rakhel steals the idol-gods!
Just as Lavan consulted his teraphim to discern the source of his abundance in order to gain more, so now his
daughter steals the idols in order to do the same. Remember, Rakhel has born only one son in comparison to
Leah’s six sons and one daughter. And though she said at Joseph’s birth, “May Yahweh add to me another son,”
we now see Rakhel taking her future abundance into her own hands by consulting the teraphim. Like father,
like daughter, like husband, like son-in-law.
What Lavan, Yaaqov, and Rakhel all share in common is a desire to experience the Eden-blessing and a
willingness to do whatever it takes to get it. In Rakhel’s case, she justifies stealing her father's source of
divination. It helped him identify Yaaqov as the source of blessing, after all. Perhaps it could do the same for
her.

Reflection Question
Based on other hints in the surrounding stories, why might Rakhel have stolen the household gods?

Class Notes: Jacob

129 of 184

