Session 6: Isaac Deceives Abimelech

Key Takeaways
God renews his promise to Yitskhaq, echoing the covenants made to previous generations.
The unusual phrase “on the heel of” means “because.” It recalls the heel of the snake crusher in Genesis
3:15, while keeping Yaaqov the heel grabber on our minds as the story focuses on his father.
Yitskhaq imitates the deceitful schemes of his father. And instead of blessing the world around him, he
brings danger to Abimelech and his people.

The Story of Yitskhaq
The literary design of this unit has been carefully crafted to invite the reader into a meditation on how the
children repeat the story of their parents, and how God’s choice of this family means that God’s justice and
mercy will also repeat through the generations.

Genesis 26:1-6
Famine, journey to Gerar, God’s

covenant

promise of

blessing, seed , and

land

Genesis 26:7-11
Yitskhaq’s fear and deception of the Philistines that puts Rivqah at risk, Avimelek’s noble
response

Genesis 26:12-14
Yitskhaq’s abundance of

seed, land , and possessions from God’s

blessing

Yitskhaq sows seed “in that land” )‫ (בארץ ההוא‬and “finds” )‫ (מצא‬100 measures and many servants

)‫(עבדה‬

Genesis 26:15-31

• 26:15-25 Disputes with Philistines over wells, promise of divine blessing
• 26:26-31 Dispute with Philistines resolved through a covenant oath , Avimelek’s noble
response

Genesis 26:32-33

Class Notes: Jacob

35 of 184

Yitskhaq’s servants “in that time” )‫“ (ביום ההוא‬find” )‫ (מצא‬a well of water that they name “Seven”

)‫(שבע‬
Genesis 26:1-33. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Summary of Genesis 26:1-14
The opening and closing units form an Eden blessing frame around the story of Yitskhaq’s deception, in which
he puts the promise of future seed at risk through his fear.
This juxtaposition emphasizes a contrast between God’s promise and provision of abundance in the outer
frames and the fear, self-preservation, and deception of Yitskhaq in the center.
Notice that in contrast to the parallel story of Abraham and Abimelech in Genesis 20, here God does not
appear in the story to tell Abimelech about the true identity of the woman with Yitskhaq. Instead, he finds out
on his own, as he gazes out from a tall window.

The Hinge Role
From this perspective, Genesis 26:12-14 forms a concluding frame around the deception story that links back
up to Genesis 26:1-6. However, the final line of 26:14 and the keyword links of 26:12-14 show that 26:12-14 is a
mirror unit that simultaneously concludes 26:1-14 and introduces the large unit to follow in Genesis 26:12-33.
The transitional unit of 26:12-14 functions as a concluding frame around 26:1-14 and as an introductory frame
that spans from 26:12-33.

Yitskhaq’s Deception of Abimelech

1 And there was a famine in the land ,

besides the first famine which was in the days of Abraham,
and Yitskhaq went

(‫ )הלך‬to Abimelek the king of the Philistines at Gerar .

2 And Yahweh appeared to him,

and he said,
“Don’t go down to Egypt!
Dwell in the land which I say to you.
3 Migrate in this land ,

and I will be with you
and I will bless you,
because to you and to your seed I will give all these lands ,
and I will establish my oath which I swore to Abraham your father,
4 and I will multiply your seed like the stars of the skies,

and I will give to your seed all these lands ,

Class Notes: Jacob

36 of 184

and all the nations of the land will find blessing for themselves through your seed ,
5 on the heel of the fact that Abraham listened to my voice,

and he kept my keeping, my command, my statute, and my instruction."
6 And Yitskhaq stayed in Gerar .

7 And the men of the place asked about his wife ,

and he said ,
“ She is
A

my sister ,”

for he was afraid to say,
“ my wife .”
“ So that the men of the place don’t murder me on account of Rivqah ,
for she is good of sight.”

8 And it came about, when the days for him there were long,

B

that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked down through a window,
and he saw, and look: Yitskhaq was playing with his wife Rivqah.

9 And Abimelech called Yitskhaq and he said, “Behold, certainly she is your wife !

And how then did you say ,
A'

‘ She is

my sister ’?”

And Yitskhaq said to him,
“Because I said,
‘ So that I don’t die on account of her .’ ”

10 And Abimelech said,

“What is this you have done to us?
One of the people might easily have laid with your wife ,

B'

and you would have brought guilt upon us.”
11 And Abimelech commanded all the people, saying,

“He who touches this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.”

12 And Yitskhaq sowed seed (‫ )זרע‬in that land

and he found in the same year a hundred measures (‫ )שערים‬,
and Yahweh blessed him,
13 and the man became great,

and he went on (‫ )ילך הלוך‬growing great
until he became very great;
14 and he had herds of flocks and herds of cattle and many servants,

Class Notes: Jacob

37 of 184

and the Philistines envied him.

Genesis 26:1-14. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

God’s Blessing and Oath
God’s initial words to Yitskhaq are a blend of all the previous blessing promises in Genesis, with a special focus
on the promises to Abraham.

God’s Promise to Yitskhaq (Genesis 26:2-5)

God’s Promises to Avraham

2

Gen. 12:1-2 Go forth from your land,

Dwell in the land which I say to you .

3a

and from your family,

Migrate in this land ,

and from your father’s house,

and I will be with you
and I will

bless

to the land which I will make seen to you ;

you ,

and I will make you a great nation,
and I will

3b

because to you and to your seed I will give all

bless

you .

Gen. 12:7 And Yahweh became seen to Avram and
he said, “To your seed I will give this land .”

these lands ,

Gen. 13:15 For all the land that you see,
to you I will give it, and to your seed , forever.

and I will establish my oath which I swore to

Gen. 22:16 I swear an oath by myself, utterance

Avraham your father,

of Yahweh, that on account of the fact that you did
this thing,

4

and I will multiply your seed

like the stars of

Gen. 13:16 And I will make your seed

like the

the skies , and I will give to your seed all these

dust of the land ,

lands ,

which, if one was able to count the dust of the
land ,
then also your seed could be counted.
Gen. 22:17 that I will certainly bless you,
and I will certainly multiply your seed ,
like the stars of the skies ,

and all the nations of the land

will find

blessing for themselves through your seed , 5

Gen. 12:3 ... and in you all the families of the
earth will be

blessed .

on the heel of the fact that Avraham listened to

God’s Blessing and Oath. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

38 of 184

God’s Promise to Yitskhaq (Genesis 26:2-5)

God’s Promises to Avraham

my voice , and he kept my keeping, my command,

Gen. 22:18 and all the nations of the land

my statute, and my instruction.

find

will

blessing in your seed , on the heel of the

fact that he listened to my voice .

God’s Blessing and Oath. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

God’s words to Yitskhaq are a careful blend of nearly all of God’s promise speeches to Abraham. Clearly, the
divine blessing for Abraham is now being passed onto Yitskhaq, and Yitskhaq, in turn, will pass it on to his
sons.
It’s important to remember that this divine blessing takes us all the way back to the creation narrative of
Genesis, where humanity was given the initial creation blessing and invitation to co-rule the world as God’s
image. This role was forfeited and then passed on to Noah, and now to the family of Abraham.

Avraham and

Yitskhaq and

Sarah

Rivqah

Gen. 9:1-17 “Be

Gen. 12:1-3;

Gen. 26:1-5

fruitful and

13:15-18; 15; 17;

multiply, fill the

multiply, fill the

22:12-17

land and subdue

land.”

Humanity

Noah and Family

Gen. 1:26-28 “Be
fruitful and

Yaaqov and Esau

Gen. 27

it ... rule over the
creatures ...”

Be Fruitful and Multiply. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Like Father, Like Son; Unlike Father, Unlike Son
Yitskhaq is replaying Genesis 12, and he is both unlike (he doesn’t go to Egypt) and like his father (he gives
away Rivqah).

Yitskhaq in Genesis 26

Avraham in Genesis 20-21

Avram in Genesis 12-13

Gen. 26:1-5 God’s blessing on

Gen. 13:1-6 God’s blessing on

Yitskhaq

Avram

Yitskhaq Compared to Avraham. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

39 of 184

Yitskhaq in Genesis 26

Avraham in Genesis 20-21

Avram in Genesis 12-13

Famine in the land, “Don’t go

Avraham goes to Gerar ruled by

Famine in the land, Avram goes

down to Egypt,” Yitskhaq goes

Avimelek.

down to Egypt ruled by Pharaoh.

Yitskhaq fears for his life, and

Avraham fears for his life, and

Avram fears for his life, and

deceives the Philistines about

deceives the Philistines about

deceives the Egyptians about

his wife.

his wife.

his wife.

Gen. 26:7 And he said, “She is

Gen. 20:2 And Avraham said of

Gen. 12:11-13 And he said to

my sister” for he was afraid to

Sarah his wife, “She is my sister.”

Sarai his wife, “Look now I know

to Gerar ruled by Avimelek.

say “my wife,” “Lest they kill me

that you are a woman beautiful

... on account of Rebekah, for

of sight ... the Egyptians ... will

she is good of sight.”

kill me and let you live. Say you
are my sister.”

King Avimelek finds out and

King Avimelek finds out and

King of Egypt finds out and

confronts Yitskhaq.

confronts Avraham.

confronts Avram.

Gen. 26:10 “What is this you

Gen. 20:9 “What have you done

Gen. 12:18 “What is this you

have done to us?”

to us?”

have done to me?”

Gen. 26:11 And Avimelek

Gen. 20:6-7 “I have not given

Gen. 12:20 And Pharaoh gave a

commanded all the people

you to touch )‫ (נגע‬her ... And if

command concerning him, and

saying, “the one who touches

you do not return her, know that

they sent away him and his wife

)‫ (נגע‬her will surely die.”

you will surely die.”

Gen. 12:17 And Yahweh struck

)‫ (נגע‬Pharaoh with great strikes
)‫(נגע‬

Yitskhaq Compared to Avraham. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

The Garden All Over Again
All three of these narratives follow a promise of great blessing for God’s chosen one, and all three are filled
with hyperlinks to the Eden failure story in Genesis 2-3.
God provides trees in Eden that are “good of sight and desirable for eating.”
God warns about one forbidden tree that will kill them: “You will surely die.”
The snake deceives the woman and the man about the tree: “You will not die.”
The woman says the forbidden tree “is not to be touched.”
God asks the humans, “What is this you have done?”

Class Notes: Jacob

40 of 184

The point: Yitskhaq replays the failure of his father and the failure of Adam and Eve in the garden. The son is a
deceiver, just like his father.
But notice, Yitskhaq’s deception and failure story has been placed after Yaaqov's deception story. This links
together all three generations of God’s chosen ones in a pattern of deception and failure: like father, like son,
like grandson!

Reflection Question
How does Yitskhaq’s deception threaten God’s plan to bring blessing through Yitskhaq and his descendants?

Class Notes: Jacob

41 of 184

