Session 28: Jacob and Esau Part Ways

Key Takeaways
The brothers, Yaaqov and Esau, cannot dwell together in unity because they have too much wealth,
most of it obtained through deception.
The genealogies in Genesis show us that the narrative is laser-focused on tracing the lineage of the
hoped-for messianic king who will crush the snake.
The Yaaqov story explores the nuance and complexity of human motives in a way that is truly unique in
the Hebrew Bible.

Brothers Who Cannot Dwell Together in Unity

36:1 And these are the generations of Esau (this is Edom).

2 Esau took his wives from the daughters of Canaan:

Adah , daughter of Elon the Hittite,
and Oholibamah , daughter of of Anah, daughter of Zib’on the Hivite,
3 and Basemath , daughter of Yishmael, sister of Nebaiyoth.
4 And Adah birthed for Esau Eliphaz,

and Basemath birthed Re’u’el,
5 and Oholibamah birthed Ye’ush and Ya’lam and Qorakh.

These are the sons of Esau that were born for him in the land of Canaan.

6 And Esau took his wives 1

and his sons2
and his daughters3
and all the people of his house,4
and his herds5
and his beasts6
and all his possessions 7 that he accumulated in the land of Canaan,
and he went to the land opposite the face of Yaaqov his brother,
7 because their possessions were too many for them to dwell together as one,

and the land of their migrations was not able to carry them,
because of their possessions.
8 And Esau dwelt in the mountains of Seir .

Class Notes: Jacob

178 of 184

Esau, he is Edom.

A 36:9-19 These are the generations of Esau, father of Edom, in Mount Seir

36:9 “Esau, father of Edom”
36:19 “Esau, he is Edom”

B 36:20-30 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, dwellers of the land

B' 36:31-39 These are the kings who ruled in the land Edom

A' 36:40-43 These are the names of the chiefs of Esau

36:43 “He is Esau, father of Edom”

37:1 And Yaaqov dwelt

in the land of the migrations of his father,
in the land of Canaan.

Genesis 36:1-37:1. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).
At the conclusion of the Yaaqov story, we find a narrative that returns us to the drama of Yaaqov and Esau that
began this movement of the Genesis scroll. Yaaqov and Esau, who were rivals from birth, are now wealthy and
have many people and possessions in their households. In fact, they have too many, and so they cannot dwell
together.
Notice the focus on Esau’s seven-fold household (the list has seven items). This is meant to recall Abraham and
Lot’s inability to dwell in the same land because of their many possessions.

Abraham and Lot

Yaaqov and Esau

Gen. 12:10-20 Abraham accumulated wealth

Gen. 27, 30 Yaaqov accumulates wealth through

through his deception of Pharaoh

his deception of his father and his uncle

Gen. 13:2 “And Abram was very heavy with herds

Gen. 36:6 “And [Esau] ... went to the land opposite

and with silver and with gold.”

the face of Yaaqov his brother.”

Gen. 13:5-6 “Now, also belonging to Lot, who went

Gen. 36:7 “Because their possessions were too

with Abram, were flocks and cattle and tents. And

many for them to dwell together as one ,

the land could not carry them for dwelling

and the land of their migrations was not able to

together , for their possessions were so many,

carry them, because of their possessions .”

and they were not able to dwell together .

Disunity Among Brothers. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Class Notes: Jacob

179 of 184

Abraham and Lot

Yaaqov and Esau

Gen. 13:12 “Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan,

Gen. 36:8 “And Esau dwelt in the mountains of
Seir. Esau, he is Edom.”

and Lot dwelt in the cities of the valley,
and he set up his tent by Sodom.”

Gen. 37:1 “And Yaaqov dwelt
in the land of the migrations of his father,
in the land of Canaan.”

Lot ends up sleeping with his daughters and

Esau ends up marrying an Ishmaelite wife and

becoming the father of the Moabites and

becoming the father of the Edomites, who live east

Ammonites, who live east of the Jordan and are

of the Jordan and are hostile to Israel.

hostile to Israel.

Disunity Among Brothers. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

In Genesis 12-13, Abraham’s ill-gotten gain causes a rupture in the family, so he cannot dwell with his brother in
peace. That conflict ended peacefully in the short term, but eventually Lot became the father of the Moabites
and Ammonites. These tribes go on to become long-term rivals who are hostile to Israel.
Similarly, in Genesis 36, Yaaqov's ill-gotten blessing and wealth also cause a rupture, and he cannot live with
Esau in peace. So the brothers separate, becoming the fathers of tribes who will be hostile to each other for
centuries to come.

9 And these are the generations of Esau,

the father of Edom in the mountains of Seir.

10 These are the names of the sons of Esau :

Eliphaz, son of Adah, wife of Esau;
Re’u’el, son of Basemat, wife of Esau.
11 And the sons of Eliphaz were:

Teman, Omar, Zepho and Ga’tam and Qenaz.
12 And Timna’ was the concubine of Eliphaz, son of Esau,

and she birthed Amaleq for Eliphaz.
These are the sons of Adah, wife of Esau.
13 And these are the sons of Re’u’el:

Nakhat and Zerakh, Shammah and Mizzah.
These were the sons of Basemat, wife of Esau.

14 And these were the sons of Oholibamah,

daughter of Anah, daughter of Zib’on, wife of Esau,
and she birthed for Esau Ya’ush and Ya’lam and Qorakh.

Class Notes: Jacob

180 of 184

15 These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau :

the sons of Eliphaz, firstborn of Esau:
chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho, chief Qenaz,
16 chief Qorakh, chief Ga’tam, chief Amaleq.

These are the chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom.
These are the sons of Adah.
17 And these are the chiefs of the sons of Re’u’el, son of Esau:

chief Nekath, chief Zerakh, chief Shaman, chief Mizzah.
These are the chiefs of Re’u’el in the land of Edom,
these are the sons of Basemat, wife of Esau.
18 And these are the sons of Oholibamah, wife of Esau:

chief Ya’ush, chief Ya’lam, chief Qorakh.
These are the chiefs of Oholibamah, daughter of Anah, wife of Esau.

19 These are the sons of Esau ,

and these are their chiefs .
He is Edom.

Genesis 36:9-19. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the dwellers of the land :

Lotan 1 and Shobal 2 and Zib’on 3 and Anah ,4
21 and Dishon 5 and Etser 6 and Dishan .7

These are the chiefs of the Horite, sons of Seir in the land of Edom .

22 And the sons of Lotan were Horite and Hemam.

And the sister of Lotan was Timna’.
23 And these are the sons of Shobal :

Alwan and Mankhat and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.
24 And these are the sons of Zib’on :

Ayah and Anah.
(This is the Anah who found the hot water springs in the wilderness,
when he was shepherding the donkeys of Zib’on his father.)
25 And these are the sons of Anah:

Dishon and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah.
26 And these are the sons of Dishon :

Khemdan and Eshban and Yitran and Keran.
27 These are the sons of Etser :

Bilhan and Ze’on and Aqan.
28 These are the sons of Dishan :

Class Notes: Jacob

181 of 184

Uz and Aran.

29 These are the chiefs of the Horite :

chief Lotan ,1 chief Shobal ,2 chief Zib’on ,3 chief Anah ,4
30 chief Dishon ,5 chief Etser ,6 chief Dishan .7

These are the chiefs of the Horite by their chiefs in the land of Seir .

Genesis 36:20-30. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

31 And these are the kings who reigned as kings

in the land of Edom ,
before a king reigned as king
for the sons of Yisrael .

32 And Bela’ son of Be’or reigned as king,

and the name of his city was Dinhabah .
33 And Bela’ died,

and Yobab son of Zerakh reigned as king in his place from Botzrah .
34 And Yobab died,

and Khusham reigned as king in his place from the land of the Temanite .
35 And Khusham died,

and Hadad son of Bedad reigned as king in his place,
the one who who struck Midyan in the field of Moab,
and the name of his city was Avith .

36 And Hadad died,

and Samlah from Masreqah reigned as king in his place.
37 And Samlah died,

and Sha’ul from Rekhoboth-Hanahar reigned as king in his place.
38 And Sha’ul died,

and Ba’al Khanan son of Akhbor reigned as king in his place.
39 And Ba’al Khanan son of Akhbor died,

and Hadar reigned as king in his place,
and the name of his city was Pa’u ,
and the name of his wife was Mehetab’el,
daughter of Matred,
daughter of Mey-Zahab

Genesis 36:31-39. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

40 And these are the names of the chiefs of Esau,

Class Notes: Jacob

182 of 184

by their families, by their places, by their names:

chief Timna’, chief ‘Alwah, chief Yetet
41 chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
42 chief Qenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibtzar,
43 chief Magdi’el, chief ‘Iram.

These are the chiefs of Edom,
by their dwellings, in the land of their possession.
This is Esau, the father of Edom.

Genesis 36:40-43. Translation and Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Jacob (2021).

Genesis 11:27-

Genesis 25:19-

Genesis 37:1-

22:19

Genesis 22:20-

35:15

Genesis 35:16-

50:20

Avraham

25:18

Yaaqov

36:43

Yaaqov's Sons'

Narratives

Death & Burial;

Narratives

Death & Burial;

Narratives

Non-chosen

Non-chosen

Genealogy

Genealogy

Genesis 11:27-50:20. Literary Design by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

This pattern highlights an important compositional design that occurs throughout the entire Genesis scroll.
The main narrative traces the lineage of the promised seed to a set of siblings. Then, after the story of their
separation, the non-chosen line is ushered off the stage with a genealogy that extends far past the narrative
time perspective. After this, the narrative backtracks and focuses on the chosen line, picking up their story.

Diagram showing where genealogies in Genesis branch between chosen and non-chosen lines.
Genealogies in Genesis. Created by Tim Mackie for BibleProject Classroom: Abraham (2021).

Reflection Question
How do the genealogies in Genesis shape the narrative, and what does this shape indicate about the
narrative’s focus?

Class Notes: Jacob

183 of 184

Session 29: Reflecting on the Jacob Story

Key Takeaways
Yaaqov’s story is a mirror in which we can examine our motives and gain perspective on how God’s
blessing shows up in our lives and in our world.
What we choose to do with the blessings God pours out has serious consequences.
Studying Scripture in community can powerfully unite people from across a wide spectrum of
backgrounds and experiences.

This session has no notes

Reflection Question
Take some time to reflect on the insights you learned in this class.

Class Notes: Jacob

184 of 184

